O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science entirely, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is its science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the understandings and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the implements of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as much as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who undertakes it mounts in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and connections and separations of veins, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and flesh and the number of veins, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the body is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you in the introduction of this book that he who is not acquainted with the things said before, if he guards himself so that he does not fall into error and that he does not injure men; thus I have often seen more than those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to their ignorance and without experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a fool who mixes  i.e., an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and mixes the arteries of the neck; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I see one other fool who treats a stone of a man with water, and the stone was large; so he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another mire who took care of one duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the mire, full of ignorance, strained the fracture onto the wound as stars by strong ligature, and did not leave any room for drainage to the wound, and left it thus; and he commanded him that he should not untie it at all; and remained so that the leg was all swollen and the foot came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was in peace and he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb as long as the limb was all lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see .i. another sore that opened .i. abscess and then inflamed by the evil of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason it is necessary that you keep yourselves safe, so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in caution and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of grievous health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galians says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness unless you want to be called a foolish healer." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and the forms of the instruments, and the workings of the cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and of the nuisance of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and of nuisance are the longest discourse and most subtle science and secret replies; and of this speak most of the sages, and agree with it; and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some advised against it and said that cauterization is great help there; and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not good for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured from hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, let no one intervene except he who has experienced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of greater secrecy of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member that is burned, and harms no other member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from member to another in separating, and bring to the member diseases of harsh healing; and by chance kills the patient The fire because of his height and for the goodness of his substance does not do this, if there is not superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they must agree on what time the cauteries should be made, and when they are ready.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the nuisances arising are reduced by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot wait for the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, like the fools do; because the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a most certain thing is that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and they are gathered together in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of iron for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; and they said that the tool of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled; and if it is heated too much; so they do at the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our cautery of fire that we have made appeared in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, for that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olivewood cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds of it made because of a disease called “soda”, and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine that loosens and liquefies the head, three or four times, according to what the virtues and the temperament and the habit of the patient can bear; and then raise the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands upon your thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs meet, if it bleeds a little, then cauterize with the cautery called “olivare”, because of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and restraining your hand poke and poke while turning it; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. small; and if you do not see it, so begin the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take .i. poke of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for .iij. days; after put a compress moistened in butter; and leave on it until the scalding is gone; after cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And it is said by the ancients, that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they help to move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must let the cautery burn so that part of the bone is burned, and then reseal what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one must leave the cautery thus longer, and to press so forcefully that one lowers the bone as wide as a ring that women put in their spindles for those that the humors come out mixed; and one must leave the wound long uncovered; after that one must cleanse and dress.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave them; because the bone is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more cured and mixed for me, and of this I use thus in assembly salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and it lasts long, the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take ward if the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery a little which we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one of them in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the sick person feels much more great pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it is spread to the patient up to the eye, and the shoulder is purified by medicines calming, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the rind and cut it 1 pock as 2 shoulders, and then make a temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum under the skin; and when it will be placed so lie and bind it well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat fiercely the piece of alum, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on cotton dipped in butter as much as possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see so do these of some burning medicines that I have written or dose treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is as follows in this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery in this shape: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. inch of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and stir the fire slightly, until half the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of seil, and put on the place for .iij. days; then you put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all the point, and guard yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and rule thus on the painful place a line of half a finger's length, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come close to the bone; and guard yourself from the jaw that it moves when one thrusts, and that the nerve does not feel more than the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard yourself from blood loss of the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know it, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in mid-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the place where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then use this cautery which is called "poins," for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After prick all around the ear of the sick one, or around the two if the pain is in both, and you are distanced a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to be cauterized; and have ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment that must be cured by cautery are not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery to resemblances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of ears and expulsions of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a pock of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery on the head of the ear above a pock below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a pock; and leave the cautery so long until the half of the heart is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a pock finer and it behooves the knife to be a pock larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that sharpen the brain; after which, rub the head of the patient all over, and put on the occiput the emplastery of mustard as is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if you make it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, good is; and if it is not, make to it .iii. cauteries of the midst between the chief down to the neck, and have of space between each cautery .i. two of gross; and cure it like the others, and if you see it joined, and the sick one suffers, make .i. cautery in the middle; and if necessity is, .ii. others upon the .ii. horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and be the cauteries which are called «olivare», as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It behooves that the head be purified with herbs and those we have said before; after this, reheat the head of the sick one, then make cautery in the midst of the head and on each horn, and .i. behind and .iii. on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the sick one suffers, and the illness is far away, make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most tender of the heart be burnt, and lift your hand; after this cure it until it is healthy, and be the cauteries which are called «olivare» as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic people should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffers from penre medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, then make gargles and mastications that modify the brain often with boiled meats; after the king makes a hole in his head in the middle, and he makes 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is bad and suffering, then make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the moisture corrupted and phlegm thick, then you cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have anointed the head of the patient; afterward make one cake of linen well done, and also one circle, so put it within the head; and the sick person should sit crossed, and be held well on all sides; afterwards present the ointment, and mix some butter of ancient goat with it; and heat it gently over a fire, so that the patient may suffer it being applied; afterwards empty the circle by within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good governance, until he be healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see someone being cauterized, doing more pricks with the whole cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery soothes the brain greatly; and then puts on cotton moistened in butter and grease of galingale.  
de l’awe des eulz	of the weeping of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When weeping comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to raise his head, and make him cauterize the center of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the weeping descends from the eyes both together, or one if it descends in one; and cut with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off the dripping of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, then staunch it as much as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you will stop it; and sometimes one does cauterization or a hatereil below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Of the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the eye downwards: one cautery in the center, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hatereil below the two bones; and if there is need more, one cauterizes cleverly above the eyebrow to all a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the course of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three cups of wine; after the king the chief, and make the cautery or olive-cautery middle; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one slightly below the cheekbones; and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare". 
de coi ci est li forme:	of this is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hairs that prick the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It sometimes happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the padding, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your sound; after rule over the paper of the eyes a figure that is as like the leaf of myrtle, and be its beginning beside the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and musk of pearlescent above the oil, then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the hairs be burned at the place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then raise your hand, and leave thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it be healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after these the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are stiff, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hair the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in .1. eye only, then must one work in .1., and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in wine of egg; and let the head of the patient be in your healthy hand and place your thumb on top of the medicine, and press .1. point and the loaf every time that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it burns as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this long, then remove the medicine with your thumb.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medication has passed, lift the place of awe, and look if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not the case, put back on the medicine on the place where the medicine did not work, until your workings are even, and your eyes are set; then put on cotton soaked in butter until the burned skin is healed, after cure the place of the ointment that is called "dyaphens" and another, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes.  
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after curing it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf. 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor lean its head; after putting moistened cotton in vinegar or in persillion juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and it is pointed to the head as like the form of a vulture's feather, altogether that it be the cautery; if you see, so it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so it be like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is pointed is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula when it is open, and remove the rotteness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate, and remove the matter from within; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part under the eye, so that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not happen, repeat the cautery once more, and another if you have need for it, and leave it for three days; after which put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine corrosive aqua until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what he would come into his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to a fistula, and make an incision; after putting into the opening a subtle cautery of which here is the form:  
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand on the cake firmly, and let the patient not move at all, that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in butter or in honey: the lead will close the fistula's opening, and the healing by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not so, then it is necessary to administer perfuse to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to how it should be in its proper place.  
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks in the lips that are called "poils," and even on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these cracks with what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then  cauterize i. small surgical knife cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he places it gently in those crevices until it comes to the top; after caring for the place with cerote until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and is enveiled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it behooves you to have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows at the top of it, and the last place; and do this once or ii., after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if those are not, it behoves to discover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here later in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long that the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after raise your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it remain an hour and rinse forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupting dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and the medicines do not help, then there is need for cautery in .ii. ways: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a dish, and the end in a spoon of iron or tin; afterward take cotton and envelop it on the point of a tent, and moisten it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and wool are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries assembled fire is such that you prick a cane of iron or steel, and be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person; after heat the cautery, from which its shape will come afterward, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or tomorrow.  
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then the root be driven; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cautery where you will, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the caine:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron as is described after comes the form, and it has openings for the fumes to issue to the cautery on the other side; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so III days; and put on moist cotton in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place of ointment and tents until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures prevail on the channels of the throat, and even when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by resolutive medicines; after that you make cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not come near to the throat, and burn only as much as a point. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" because we have its form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy. 
de la toust	of the pain
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and malady of poison are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is ancient, if he makes two cauteries on the forceps in their places; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be which are called 'clavile' according to the form that is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cautery in pricking at all the cautery that is called 'points' because its form is as before in the disease of ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at III rains according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for those are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three in one piece.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After it is supported the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift up the heart that is inside the tittle with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, so cauterize it which has .ij. ners  for this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces up to the ribs, and would come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this reason is made cautery with the cautery which has three ners, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted upon this, i.e., nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cautery forceps ground with sail; after make rest the patient, and let not move his limbs by long time until it be well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in prickling. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is set, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is cured.  
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it is altered in complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and in manners of cures accustomed and he does not profit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Of this afterward I make III cauteries 1 under the collarbone of the hip by the quantity of one penny, to all the shoulder blade cautery, and II cauteries of fire on the two ribs until the shape of the cauteries is in III angles, and have such space between each other that they are not joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so deep that they penetrate the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:  
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and seigne on the stomach at point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize the whole cautery which is called 'poins'. 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the treatment that we have had before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When to the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is been taken out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those that we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from them, it is necessary that the patient be soothed on his mattress; and sign III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of man come; and there be space between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be long in the body, and do not press your hand too much on the whole cautery; and it be burned only half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you desire it, thus cauterize these cauteries with the curette, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take heed that you do not burn all of the heart, for you would cause the whole body to dry out; and that it does not come to boiling, because the hearts are very subtle there, and you know it well.  
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the capsule, he feels piercing pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure departs from the sights, it befits that the patient be bathed on his head; and then reign over the place where the abscess is, and then warm the cautery which is similar to the beam, for this is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery as long as the hairs are burned, and come up to the shaft, so that the skin is entirely healed; after the cure according to the cure of wounds until it is healed; and it is not proper for anyone other than those who have studied medicine for a long time, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured many times, to use this cautery. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly operate, and altogether it seems to me better to leave it. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient say that one must make on the pleuresin cauteres of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the most great that thou canst find, and be dry, and as thick and as long like thy fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two little cauteres a point going down in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteres between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a point; and one cautery amidst the breast, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the two ribs of the breast behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and press not thy hand, but do openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that no one old man used cautery of fire seeming to the razor, and it is heated and put between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and soon goes out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed. 
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mice with what we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which some manner is that thou makest III cauteries, or IIII, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten thy hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be laid on his back; and another manner of cautery is that thou heateth the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is above the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation by which thou liftest the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After it puts the two nerves inflamed as much as the kernels are pierced from the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, so cauterize with all the cautery at three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes".  
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary that you make IIII cauteries around the throat, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and II behind the back on the spine, and one place the breast; and let the cauteries be near the edge of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open to fight for long time putrefaction, and do not leave at all the cure of the sick after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have before shown; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is placed above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of a bright yellow fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply by force, so tightly closes outside the yellow awn, and let the cautery be according to this form: 
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife-blade; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may stay in place; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient suffering well and of great virtue, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what we have spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel small to every one cautery clavicle small, and two cauteries on the kidneys.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are or at the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you do cauteries: III above the spine of the back, which is all outside under the almecade poc and poc in triangulating, and I cautery below the hood II should; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then to the face one does I great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice at all the cauteries clavile; and leave the cautery open long. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure the place until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is named “thelul”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the “thelul,” if the cautery seems like a razor, then put it all ablaze on that “thelul” and cut; and let it stay there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood does not come out; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of openings beneficial as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the “alchatim,” it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a sickness that it can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula, and it is filled and gives putrefaction and corrupt moisture, then the doctor should provide at once a subtle tent, and keep that you know at once the tent how much it has of length. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, and putting it into the fistula according to the quantity that the patient has entered there, and re-heat the cautery as long as the corrupted flesh is burned, once or II or III, according to the quantity of need; and take care not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, then guard these parts, and do not make those fuers than in flesh, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is sound, and if the places are saielez, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely sound; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is bad, and corrupting the bone at its root; and thus like one of these that we shall say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and does not take any semen [from a woman], then it is necessary that you make cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery chisel which we have said before; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part outside above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as two finger widths; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be pointed according to the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow; and when they arrive, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the waist, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be pointed, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found the location of the viscus department, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint at one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the location around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and if it is the cautery such as the one with which the stomach was cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as perfect as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: therefore you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to say together medicines ardent, and cautery of fire. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is made in many ways, one of which is as follows: that you cauterize on the side of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make it good depth and width, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped. Sometimes one makes cautery in the middle on top of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the core be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it is done for sciatica when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a little; and be the cautery cuticular, or be the cautery of the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, cauterize there where he feels the pain three fingers or four with the cautery which is called "finger." 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if this trade is necessary, if one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then he makes cautery with the cutellar or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of belly from which he had death. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.  
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, from this is the manner, make such iron and be at the head also as much as a thimble of finger, or a little less, and be by entrechetres and be from one entrechetres to the other of space the quantity of a knuckle of fist; and be the entrechetres toward II parts, and be also like nuts, and there is the hip of iron well made; and this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and let it be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and let it for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regret, and we rarely see who uses it; and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning are that you make the instrument at intervals in which descend the edge of the door, and be of iron or steel a length, and in the height have it two, and have between each the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be open above and below, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put the bolster of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand very above the bolster of the hip; after place between the two circles of the hot awl which be heated at the fire one part, and let him for an hour of time, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is found medication also with fire; and when the medication has passed, raise your hand with the instrument and raise the buttock gently, and leave thus for III days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scalding is removed; and let it be for III days that rot draws out of it; and this would be the last aid after the cure of dressings until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, then you make the instrument that holds it according to what you have done in the hip augmentation; and this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each as possible, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.  
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening of fire where the point of a razor can enter; and puts one pot over the other well sealed, and puts on top alkali and charcoal and sweet water, until there is a good amount above the powders as you will take it well grasped in your hand; and leave it so until the sweetness descends like water and stool or whatever is sealed, then take all that sweetness, and throw it on charcoal and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it will be very hot and is administered in many works of medicine and cauteries of other members because it does the work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip just as the testicle and honey anacardi and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galens tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatica, and it helped him greatly, and said that they did no other cure for him, and he was healed at one time when this cure was done to him, and he bathed as he teaches here afterwards.  
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in this manner that you take the litharge green fresh and dry, and grind it much with a point of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and apply it; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more burn.  
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make it enter into the bath until the body of it be a little aroused, and make it enter into bed, and the pain will go away altogether and will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And knows that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.  
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with iron filings, it helps a lot; and it must be done in this manner of cautery.  
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a cloth and soak it with old oil, and put it on the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called the foscile. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking wool from a dry goat, and embroiling it in fire until it is charcoal, put it on the wool, and let it rest until it is extinguished; and do this again, and never cease doing so until you feel by sense that it comes to the hip, and that the pain is ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat." 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are suitable for cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after what the patient is purged of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with charcoal, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "point"; and if you see fit, make 3 or 4 cauteries on the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight abdomen when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you view it being cured, cauterize it with this cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it so, cauterize around the spine with the burning cautery two lines or three, and let the points be near each other. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the place as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not administer cautery in a glibness which is in a spam of nerve.  
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you seize upon the face of the foot, then apply the cautery to the whole cautery as one claims "point". 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then to each knee make III cauteries or IIII of each part, with all olive oil cautery; and if you have need of more, make more, but do not hold your hand away from there than when the center of the fire is burnt. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, so make poins around the foscile II lines; and if there remains no pain in the two, so make poins on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, so cauterize each part, and make good government to the patient and think medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and cleanse his phlegm, he will recover with God's help. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the hips and it is new, if you see him cure it, that he does not move that day; and that he uses things which hold the belly, so that the bowels descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpit as long as the testicles are repaired, and pull them to your heels, and then set a cautery of this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it feels soft 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the minister holds his hand on them so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other on the hip which holds his hands; then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, begin again once more until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not protrude when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other harm. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of large people also large according to their measure; after III days cure their place of the cautery of butter as much as the scalding is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lie the patient XL days on his back until the wound is well soldered; and it is necessary that his nurses be tired for a long time, so that the boil do not emerge when he will want to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, one administers a good splint to him, and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, that he works little and wards off too much repletion of drink and eating, and of too much braiding; and if he does this teaching so is healthy entirely. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall say here afterwards the cure of tailoring in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said one must cauterize with the cautery at III angles according to this form. 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first sign the place of incision and make a line across the breadth above the rupture, and another below, and keep your hand steady on all the cautery clavicle. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, either from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommence the other cautery on that one, for such custom is that he must heal in the member that is closest to him, for which it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.  
de meselerie	of melting
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The boils are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and even the malady that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see the patient being cauterized, take heed if the patient is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not remove or delay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the sick person, then make V cauteries on his head: I am putting the head to nine, and the other towards the front to the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the top of the head; and let it remain so long as the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the peels issue forth so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape from them; and cauterize on the mice according to what is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the melting is spread everywhere; and it clearly progresses, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the hip and .i. other on the side, and .ij. on the .ij. shoulders; and .ij. on the arms, and .ij. on the tendons of the leg, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the heel bone, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cauterize on the bone of the thumb, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when more cautery is made, the more it does help, and moves it profits; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as healthy people feel it, for that reason because the body is already totally corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the place with a mixture of flour of almonds with honey and other treatments until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the skin; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at times one makes cautery by hand and by foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus is removed the swelling; and nonetheless let no one intervene unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.  
de albaras	of  bars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease that is called "albaras" is serious and the means of medicine avail nothing, then cauterize it with a cautery a small hole according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the blanching is removed, and its color has changed; then cure it with flour of rice and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondre, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and leave it at the place as long as it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of syphilis by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nonetheless the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the sore; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circule", as we have said in much of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die, or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after leave it thus. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it becoming worse with all the cauterizing, then heat the cautery from this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of this malady which is called «adubelati» until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot is raised. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed.  
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	One other manner of sickness there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing else than a corruption of limb, for it devours the limbs as though fire eats dry lines. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can suffer fire cautery, then sharpen the cauteries small and large, according to what is necessary for the place where the illness is; after cauterize all parts until you reach all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places softened crushed with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of blemishes generates flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if those do not, re-begin the cautery on those which are remained corrupt. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this malady has sometimes been cured with the application of a hot cautery in place of fire; but nonetheless, the cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the treatment of the application of a hot cautery in the section: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From the roots that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that by fire a disease is born in the feet called «closed», according to our understanding, and it is a very bad thing that discolors the foot.  
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness is according to two manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron like a feather of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can bend the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle edges; after that put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it so III days until it begins to get rotting; then I make a plaster of wild mallows ground with silk, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment hindering flesh until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, it behooves you to bring them cautery of hot water; and is in such manner: take a cane of iron or steel, or a pen of vulture, and put on the nail and the small hole, that is to say, for calluses; and put the cane so that it prickles all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep to the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water an hour; then let him so, and it will disengage all at all its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, as long as you eradicate all those which are in the body, then cure the openings that generate flesh.  
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make to them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or pez, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; if leave will the trembling, and hasten will the healthy from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent by fires the body bathed, or pimples painful, which come from large corrupted matters. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that its point be seized by fire, or of long aristeloge root, or of the lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterize one at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow back from them, but are disrupted the superfluities that come from them, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hastily put your finger index upon the wound of the vein, and strain it much until the blood be quieted under your finger, and that no drop issues forth more; then place on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are all red; then take one, or greater or lesser according to the wound and its location where the artery is cut, and put the cautery upon that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding be stayed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps forth when you lift your finger from upon the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein shortens from the artery, one cannot well stretch it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch the vein; and let it be bound and strained firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring a stretching of the lier tightly with straps or to put things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit so much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mire nor medicine present, then he must put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but often moisten it with cold water that it be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make in front those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of the stones
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the illnesses for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and shapes of the cauteries; and I have put that chapter from the head right down to the feet, and in this chapter I will go by the same way for those things that are more easily found than those you want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore, my dear child, as I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have gotten so sick with their illness that they die easily because of the hardship that they find in their illness, and the greatness of their evil; and of these one must have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who tell you their meaning, and say: “Wait, I am healed”; and the patient is deceiving. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not operate foolishly but wisely from those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have praise for; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and these will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory of length. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised them from the chief until feet, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the chief full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this sickness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the head of the child; and some time it comes from a reason unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and to all that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and it seemed so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide slit; and be as long as two thumbs, as far as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the edges of the head are open from each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then you must cut in the middle of the head three slits according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract the moisture all outwards.  
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After you have strained the fissures of cloth and powders, and put wine and oil there, and let it so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the chief bandage be restrained, and then feed the patient dry meat from moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healed.  
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and its filling of fluid, and widen it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone a malady which is called "catarrh" at the eyes or in the chest, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the final cure is that cautery with this one on one covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It therefore happens that when you see them covered, the patient must make his head back; then rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck to the whole cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and so they are placed again; then sign the veins of the flesh, then cut both with a sharp spatula from II part, as long as the cut comes up to the bone, and it should be by the wide part of the head.  
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, thrust the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two thumbs across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it throws out blood continually upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of III fingers, then seize it and make until the bone; and what it is necessary to put out blood is VI c/, and by chance a bit more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the syphac, then you must cover it so that pus does not come, then restrain the wound and tie it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, for the moistors of tears and the heats in the temples and old-fashioned foreheads and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is rarely found outside than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is found, strain the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it above the incisions, and carefully separate the threads that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it with the point of the awl, then cut that part according to the quantity of the two bones. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not leap at all throughout.  
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in .ij. lengths with a strong double silk thread so that putrefaction does not come before the suturing of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cutellary cautery until the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help to end the moisture: for this cause it is of greater help to moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on top well-made tents; and when they are untied, let them be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a ligature of the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it to your hand that the wound is stained; and if you do not have these present, put over the place your cloth until the wound is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be restrained as it should be; and what is more helpful and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching at .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to keep their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thick, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have between the two knives one, and it must be of great width, and then when you have marked the two joints, and you place the red hot iron on them until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not welded by this cautery at all, and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on the forehead above the face of power, and no benefit comes from medicine in doing so, and you see the face of the sick person shrink, and feel on their forehead a motion as if they were shivering; and where the eyes are swollen and wet so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall out, and the eyebrows are dried up, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it "contused cure" in the old times, and it is that you do behind the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has or front, then he makes III incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as II should entirely remove the forehead down to the nose, and the other II along the ribs above the papers, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are on the II ribs above the papers; and move your hand away from the continuation of the II jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of III does across the joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then put the sharp spatula with the II parts as it is here the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two incisions to all the flesh that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second, and then extract further this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If it is put in the first notch the instrument which is called "cultellary", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the rib cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the rib side towards the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as the eyes so long as the incision is continuous to the one who opens the heart, and then another part make in the middle cut to the other end; and then take out the blood evenly, and express their place for the taken blood; then put in each cut a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths moistened in wine and oil and asile, and keep that no abscess come there; and at the third day untie the lien, and then administer much boiled water, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	of the eye
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any person comes with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes red and small, and the vision weakened, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and where it is felt there is a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore you know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is there, such is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to rear their forehead, then make a great fissure in the middle of the forehead, and another one through the brow. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the feed; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then suture between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep yourself from a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until pus begins to arise, then cure it with drying things, which make flesh come up. 
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from it; and administer it on these wounds to harden the cartilage throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping up the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which falls into ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or something similar as iron; or seed, like lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear to the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if there distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and cause him to sneeze by condiment, and plug his nostrils when the sneezes come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times comes force by this cure; and if it does not come force, then administer an extraction with fine tweezers, for that is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with tweezers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine single-edged tool; and if it does not come out with that, make a small snare of thread and insert the head of the snare or through the opening of the ear forcefully, and stop what surrounds the snare with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the snare; then pull it out carefully, because many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take a little glutin (birdlime) and put it on any instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glutin onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that an abscess comes out and spasms; and the manner of the splitting is that you first bleed the patient of the cephalic, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer incision to that grain.  
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear ache therefore when it falls in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a first of externals remedies, and fill the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear where the water is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps forward because of this, it is good.  
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it is not so, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, and lightly heat them in the fire; and put them in the patient's one ear opening, and hold up above, from his feet on the other side, and place a stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease making this from stone to stone until the water flows out entirely, and so it will be completely drained; and if you see, take a reed, and put one end into the ear, and the other end hold it in fire until the most tender part of the reed is burned; then reheat another piece of reeds until the water flows out completely, as we have said in the stone.  
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body which one can feel, then administer extraction with pincers; and that is the thing more light to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appears any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the cauterization of which this one is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed forming to all the dog; do this often as many worms exit.  
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to this, so stuff the ear with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, so administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the incision of worms, and you will find them who treat distillations; and if distillate your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or iron, narrowed below to one small opening, and wide above for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around the point neatly with cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you wish of your medicines in the chain, and let the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated by the fire, then as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping up the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the stoppage of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these stoppages come sometimes from inside the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen .i. pock deep inside the ear, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That one which comes from inside, if one cannot see it, is of bad healing in many cases, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammation apparent, then the work has total these spatumile of this thing is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is wholly removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppuration is in the ear, take a subtle razor light and heat it a little at the fire, then put it into the body of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for no day until the wound is closed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on pulverized vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures which remove the bleeding that are or treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of the writing
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the healing for those eyes that come from paper when they are moist and dry, so it befits you to extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from their roots; then put on top of it pounded vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not come out with this method, then cauterize them with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision is made, the cauterization takes effect; and many times they disappear, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
de la gresle	of the groin
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem glassy in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstorm," and it is an assembly of moisture great in the paper above and below; the work is such: take ward if the hailstone moves from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the wide, then the peel of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without feeling a bit of the paper, do not worry the patient; and if the tear is large, sew it together, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, because the flesh restores it quickly and creates flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper over, and being the hail to pliers, and the cut and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not grieve anything; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye of salted water, and cure the place of that which prevents cartilage until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is engendered in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to others, and grieves their eyes greatly, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this they lie down on their faces afterward, and sleep on them, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance has covered with exinach which opens in the eye.  
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place to your thumbs and feel the separation between them.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your knee; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exina from each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exina is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moistor with the spatula cutting a fissure of the width, and not be more than the wound that one makes in the vein; and make the leather in depth until you come to the exina; and in more disorders comes exina from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract therefore with a whole piece of cloth between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, until you come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not bleach it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so lightly pry the split until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and vinegar, and put on top, and restrain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind hay and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is lodged. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for it until it is healed.  
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place abscess hot, so the cure of plasters soothing until it is healed.  
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born adjusted other than the natural ones, and are envelted, they harm the eyes, and bring various diseases like accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery whole fire, or by medicine ague according to that which it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and suture or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your left hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, put a needle with one thread above; and whether it is near the edge of the paper where the hair grows near these hairs, and bring one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, at all the spatula, from the great tear up to the small; then extract one thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign above the paper a figure of an enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raising the paper which is divided at all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it happens to someone who needs it, cut a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make across all the spatula on the II lines that you have marked, and commence from the bottom a great tear up to little; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the incision into one of the two angles close to the heart, then peel it completely; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all fine wool thread, and wipe the blood, and make air out the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows with nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, take no care, then leave the stitch and the threads until III days or IIII; then cure the wound without stitches with dry things and constricting, because the paper revives by the touch of the wound and the joining of it, but the stitch is changed (as the ancients said), and this work without fear; and if in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to III incisions according to the shape which is here. 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what surpasses the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle that has the thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put the other thread next to the big tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin on what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the slings is as follows: and that you convert the paper and the fold inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. slings by art, and .ij. subtle ligaments as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads from .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper above the eye, and strain the .ij. slings from the .ij. parts that form; and let it remain like this for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrink and bear itself, until it comes out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if it is cut with some force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the form of the II cannons that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the works are such that you prick an awl, and it puts one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk brightly, and tie the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head on your hand; and let it be toward the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and small work; then put the needle to the whole chase in the root of the hair close-set, and make it pierce the paper smoothly until you draw it upwards from the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural cheeks, and let it rise with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness which is called "aleacrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by suddenness of wound, or cutting or cautery, and by similar things.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you split that suture, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it does not become that you use in the cure of it of things that dry and restrain.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; but there is a work of softening things, like fenugreek; and the rose of water or high and flax seeds are cooked, and diacoylon oil melted in any oil, and envelop a tent, and cure with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocations is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you pierce a needle, in which it has a double thread, and put it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes out to the two shoulders of the flesh; then the flesh on top of the entire needle, and the cut with the spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is due, it is good; if those are not, then take the razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make splits where it costs inside the paper; and be the heads of the two splits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has the name "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is raised down from what follows the paper, then adjust the two parts separated, and the seams with a thread of wool; then care for it as we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the ailment comes from a cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything with all their power how they make it return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture happens to humans in such a manner that the paper above is joined with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the being as pinches, until you cut what is hardened at the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too trenchant, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp does not blind the eye; and be your incision, which you scrape off that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it heals all that assembly, and do no times in the eye salt water, and the lev of sweet water, and of colliers; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in yolk; and after the third day use the colliers and things so much until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and similar to one hard syfac, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white moistor frozen, that when one touches it with iron and one cures it panre as pinches, so it cannot; and one and the other semblance commences towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle with small doubleure, and the stem upwards; then take a needle, and put one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle one poc and put it into the angle, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the stem upwards, and scrape all the hair the edge of the angle that follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the subtle spatumile and as small forces, and leave the char natureil or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears acostumeement; and no times estent the angle at the oncine solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scrape one has with all the subtle spatumile souef of this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the prickle be not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of crushed silk, and of the collar made of lead, and let it remain until the next day; then cure it as is fitting until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the fingernail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a fingernail is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the fingernail subtly, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason is rapid, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of lead and red collar and crushed silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, as long as it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a pus-filled abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess first until it is clean, then restart the work as before, until it is clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the eye socket and cut off a part, not all at once, so that no more tear comes; then distill in the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red, and cover the eyelid and restraint on the papers and turn them to the fire, and seem like a rose of a balustrade; and the work is that the sick man puts his head in your healthy one, then the worker opens the eyes, and coil all that flesh with needles suitable for those, and the sustain it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting to the shaver until the end, and keep that you do not blind the eye during the work; and let the incision be like the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and as small forces of which one removes the sebum, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of basil or you distill red colic and similar medicines corrosive, and put on the eye fire cotton with yolk of egg, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood cloth mounts over your eyes, and you doubt a hot abscess, so leave the eye and cure the abscess of things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many flesh are adjusted in the eye by this semblance.  
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless it behooves you to heal the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red that are covered over the eye, and take from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that first you look at the eye, whether it is in place or not, and there is no other ailment besides the eye; therefore, the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins throughout the entire neck according to your knowledge, and let the needles be doubled subtly according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two lines be by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, if distill in the eye kohl green and red to corrupt what is remained of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have power to gather all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are appeased and is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine burning according to those that I have before said, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, then take all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "sharp chief," and it is made from fire iron one chief point, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is sutured and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is sutured, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not suppurating, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at 3 angles, and let the shaft be thinned until the top as you see here.  
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone next to the lacrimal bone, and keep your hand away from the eye socket, then turn all the way around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes in his eye if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the parts, then the matter goes to the cheek; thus it is an easier thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	of the eye's issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open fully and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, then you must bind the patient; then heal, then put suction cups or a heater without hurting to suck, then put on the eye one linen made of wool, aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain by above a strong bandage, and resume suction cups to suck without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must strain it much; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then resume the plastering and bandages and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the displacement of a web woven
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven web, then it opens and comes forth like pieces of resin, as if one were seeing; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part until that above, then thrust another needle where there is one double thread from the part of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the web together, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put on top a small piece of wool in abundance of an egg; and leave it until the threads fall with the web, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at no time is the wound restrained by the web on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye gives a great appearance, then pierce it with the sharp instrument that comes from within the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and bring down the eyes, and enter into them immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bulb of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This sickness which is called «alcunnati»  is nothing other than a bow which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upon the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from II parts, and move it so that you see the bow come upwards to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and let it be disordered the light, and the patient sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descending of the bow is not arranged as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make on the cornea of the eye, a point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the bow is issued; and when it is issued, you distill in the hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that is boiled and honey, then be cured of another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the likenesses of swords in division, and what is necessary to examine; thus we work according to health.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye and hold it very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the width of a fingernail in that white part of the eye to the part of the less tear, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" virtuously, and tighten your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the perfect measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the liquid is, then express it out one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After repose I little, and if the water comes back up the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is ens fixed and it does not go up, straightaway withdraw the almond lightly by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back in water a little of seil gemme, and leave from that the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put with a vessel of oil or soft wool soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and tie it with the healthy eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top a kind of mortar with abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deeply in by force, but make it subtle, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with the doctor following, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition up to the third day; then untie him in the same dark house, and probe his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align this, because the water rises quickly.  
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the abscess comes, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who assuage the abscess; and when it is calmed, then untie the view and put on its face the orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he goes from the house little by little, and converts himself to his case; and know that none of the disciples should interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almond perceive, so that one sucks the liquid, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, for those who do not know them they see them; and be of pure rain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone upon the joint
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At no time are born or made various joined parts, because of which some seem scorpions with many feet; and if there are such ones where the flesh is discolored of a bad hue, and then some flesh of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chariots which is swollen and not cracked, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the oncine in those chariots, and the trail out; then cut what you can sustain with the subtle sharp spatula on one part, as long as you know that this chariot is completely removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any thing remains that one cannot cover, open it all i.e., with instruments subtle and lightly so that nothing remains; and if without the swelling or abscess is caught, secure it as it is fitting; and if it are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is stopped and all the matter is removed, then pour on nettle or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut: therefore, it befits you to put I thread of linen a bit thick, and be soaked with hands ours, and have between each knot a space I must or less; and put the patient’s shoulder on the thread in his nose to its end, and pull in odorating until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do children thus at school, and it is light thing to him who wants to do so; then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other being as those which are or thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as much as you know that the new ones have corrupted that flesh, then treat the wound, wipe the blood, and moisten the wound in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight to the head as before; do this III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the head a bandage of plank for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills oils and medicines onto the head: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a caine, and conduct it so; and if you see fit, make a closed caine, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; and have one handle to the head for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone upon the joint
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a sickness is born upon the joint called "telul," and it grows and becomes large, so much that it is a terrible thing to see; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and extract all bone, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in cutting until it is large, beware if it is hard, with dark color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark colored, and you see that one can cut it all, then reassure the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the joint is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these working cartilages, it profits little, for in no humans. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, it is seen if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips together with a seam, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already dried on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and restrain them, and powder above powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it dries out by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To men's mouths, abscesses hard occur within, similar to grains of millet, smaller and larger; therefore it behooves you to turn the lips, and cut on each one, and take with tweezers and cut it in each part; then put the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stained; and then the salve of this, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times flesh grows on the gums, that the ancients call "albulus"; so it behooves you to support it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and leave the wound or blood; then put on the place powdered vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times it occurs, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are putrid; so it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your palm, and clean the teeth or the sores that appear, until nothing remains there; and thus do of the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are visible; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if those do not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all cleaned; and know that teeth need various types of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows you, because the scraper with which one cleans outside the teeth has other forms than that which one cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It behooves you when you cure the tooth of its pain that you tarry with drawing as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; for it is a substance very high until such time as one has no excuse to clean.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to endure suffering, it is necessary that you be certain of which tooth aches. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain suffers the patient, and thinks that it is a tooth of Saint, and draws out the good tooth; and all way does not depart him the pain because of this, as long as the evil remains, for we have already done it to his elders; and when you are well certain of the tooth hurting, then it behooves you to scrape around the tooth with every little spatula strong to ward the gum from all parts; then the moves to your two or with tweezers subtle at the first pinch and pinch, as long as it is well dislodged, then confirm the tweezers well; and let the head of the patient in your holy between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently insert it on each side, and move it like you did at first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with cloth where the holes are; and if you restrain it subtly with pliers, that it does not break when you restrain it; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to displace the tooth.  
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore warn well that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first.  
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard yourself that you do not do as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and their boldness break sometimes the cartilage, and bring them not what we have recounted; but they bring often by the opening of these great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or for the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding comes from it, which often happens, apply to the place vitriol ground; and if that does not help, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, for which one must sharpen the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-tempered iron, and be toothed for better grip.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary to put upon it moistened cotton wool in butter for a day or two. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the eyes are moist, put the pincers called "algefri" in them, so that the eye seems like a bird's beak; and inside be made as if with a file and this is the form: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after here:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not all counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases that the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks a bone or another bone, or can, then seek the instruments that are needed, as I have said to you, and help with gestures, by this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then the king has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the body's natural shape, and the form is ugly, and even in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed; then raze it; and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is here, and is like a small beak, and let it be of tempered steel, sharp at the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping piece by piece in hands a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then file with a similar file as this is its form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth piece by piece in hands a few days gently, so that it does not move until it falls; then make it smooth at the end without any burr, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth moves, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he does not bite, and you have cured them with restraining medicines, and this is no good; if it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, because the silver wire becomes green and spoils, but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth crowded, take the wire and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the chiseled piece between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you come sagely to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again to the point where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, until it does not move at all; and let the thread be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then catch the bones of the thread with pliers and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth and the one in its place as if it did not press down on the tongue. And then let him stay so tight as long as he can, and if it comes undone or the threads break, bind it again with another thread. Thus remains and serves until all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two broken ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then it is put back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a tooth made of deer bone is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	At no time is this ligament which comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a joined wound; and the work is such that you operate the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is stiffness or anything else, and this is from the joining of a wound, so put the awl and cut wide that ligament; and keep that the cutting is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, then raise the cold rose water and of fresh water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and bind the sick person each night, that the places may not join. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place broken glass on the spot; and if the bleeding persists, cauterize it with a small cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of dark color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, because it is a chancre; and if it is declining to be white, and there is moisture, then put the awl, and cut it with a fine spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop in your work, then put on top ground vitriol until it is bleached, then return to your work until you have extracted everything; then lift the level of honey and seal, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes within the throat come boils called “godath,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and fuscous color, then do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but let it alone until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color red, and the root is subtle, have the instrument prepared to cover, but first look if the abscess chills rests and is appeased.  
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be on your lap, and he opens his mouth and you place the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue down below all of the instrument, for this is the form; and let it be of silver or thin iron like a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue to the entire instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and place it in the almond, and thrust it upwards as much as you can; and do no thing with the cloths, then cut with the instrument, for this is the form, that seems a force; and however the head are curved, and one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or lead:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, for this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one side and the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and thus, and if a discharge of blood happens, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then care for it until it is healed; and at any time abscesses are born in the throat other than the two almonds, cut them therefore like the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say the abscess of little size; and I had well nearly closed all the throat, so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would be dead if she remained thus one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high raised that it had been put two reigns by the two openings of the nose.  
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had therefore immediately, and placed one in the one incision, then I drove the tool out, and into a large portion of bowel; then I refilled the other part in the other puncture of the two, and worked the mouth and pressed the tongue; after I placed the instrument in these abscesses, and scraped a part, and there came out only a little blood; and thus was opened the duct of the throat to the woman, and began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I enclosed it and cauterized it within the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and know only what God did with him after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the shape of the grape is described, and it is plump and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is rather large and round, it is called "grape". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the pus of the abscess is calmed, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one which is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of red color or black, then it is necessary that you drain the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril for the patient.  
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have made remembrance of before; then place the needle in the grape, and draw it out, and cut with the one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice, and to speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and cure until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, then it is necessary that you use an instrument to the cauterization of the senses of fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confides with a sharp live sock, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the end of this instrument, for this is the form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the grape; and let the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle move from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the windpipe; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burn and the mordications of the medicine be calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cauterization of the medicine, then commence it again, and after the cauterization wipe around the grape, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, unless the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysop and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or any of them in 1 pot, and put it inside, and make boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have 1 instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or of iron, and be the one of the shoulders put into the mouth of the patient until the vapor mounts to the eye through the vein, as long as the eye is mortified; after, it often recommences, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put in its head a crust of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the crust of egg does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether health. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or spine of fish or any thing is lodged in the throat; so it behooves you therefore to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by adventure if it will withdraw the thing by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1 morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge 1 thread, and then swallow it; and when it will come to the place, it will be lodged, and then you will draw out further; and if it does not come out by what we have said, take 1 instrument of wood according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head held high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all does not come to life, nor push in the bone within; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, for because he feels where the thing is hoarse; so he pushes down, or he draws it out with all the instrument equally, as long as it is far.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's cut
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	At no time is medicine used to the bleeding wound, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when these do not help, then look in the throat of the patient in the sun, then you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the hemorrhage, treat it with every small pincers, or subtle forceps that are fit for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a cat's head, and put it in the throat of the sick person, then put where the neck of the cat is hot iron, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has water every day.  
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full I vessel of cold water, and operate the mouth, and put it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he will fall. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will come down without tarrying. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is this that you take a pot where there are burning coals, and let it be covered with a covercloth pierced in the middle, and in that one is put the head of the instrument; then you throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the throat; and the throat will now flow, and if it does not flow, then you begin again fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to flow by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to tongs bent so as to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness from lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those that remembrance comes after in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two ways, one being in its own likeness, and the other from moisture it holds.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those eyes which are on the body.  
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.  
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one must not pierce until the bow is mature according to its completion; and if to such ones it is proper to pierce when they are crusted, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is fully rotten, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.  
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Ou the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it so that it is ripe; and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess crudely without complete digestion, except for the one which is near the foundation, lest it burrow inward, become elongated, and a fistula come forth; and may not heal in a great time.  
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and of the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where it is most dependent from the abscess, and where it opens outwards; and be the piercing long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no crease.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that fall, according to which limb. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	Because if you pierce him in front of these, the body from his sperm will be elongated and it is full of much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and the depths of him. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members need.  
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must make in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to carve out the core, and cover; when it has become as I drapes, and is withered, then you must do as with buboes: and if there are such that are cut in III angles, and if there are such that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angles; and if there are such where one makes a round size, and other sizes and similar cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, such as a superficial abscess, it behooves you to pierce him through; and when the abscess is large, and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then plug up the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing directly; do this many times, little by little, until the pus is gone altogether; same if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small child, or old man decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes jumps out with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you don't worry about it.  
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, administer bands of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that it comes against the other; and if you have struck into the abscess part of the skin, and you have raised it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or lint scraped from linen without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then bone, and cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, so administer cold water and oil, and wet the bandage, and place it on the bleeding area many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is in winter's time, and the lesion or abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put upon it tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the lesion is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put upon it cloths moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then unbind the abscess, and wipe it, and cure it, as it is fitting, until it is healed.  
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this it is necessary to know universally in the treatments of abscesses: for I have told you how one must go before the treatments of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When there comes pus from the head and they are in manners of ours that are in nets, like the joints of a chain, and many such similarities.  
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such that have moisture as well as pulses; and there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are that you prove to all instrument which is called « entromissoire », of which its form comes after, what thing it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let it be covered from above with something long. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is dried, one should scrape it without leaving the hair that contains the moisture, for it returns as soon as one leaves it; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and remove those which are left of the night. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it does not remain in the wound; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the fat, then cut it according to this form, long; and lay your forceps on it, and flay it from all sides, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery does you contrary, then do what I told you after.  
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do for the abscess if it is suppurating, and as to cutting and curing as I have told you.  
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter, because they are of little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if to some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these fut I abscesses that I copied or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had broken any, one would have done it as well as a wound.  
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, it is that those who come to the chief of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be always at the lowest point, so that pus may flow out; and care as it is appropriate. 
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes come from other places or parts of the body, and are bad, and are joined together.  
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrophule is properly within its side, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophules are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and if there are bad ones who do not want to obey health. 
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that therefore you see of good disposition at the touching, and is seeming to the color of the body, and moves of each part and is not harmed as nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep; so it is fitting that you cut it from above, and the scabs from each part, and let the two lips of the heart be in one, if you have need of it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and the treat piece by piece, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and not be too spatula thick nor trenching, that the hand does not escape, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.  
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you accomplish it; then examine with your index finger if there are any small pustules, and cut them and remove them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great vein at the root of the scrophule, it is not fitting that you cut that scrophule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there is no more superfluity for the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and draw out pus, and apply the cloth as we have said.  
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce there where it opens more; and pierce it as that before said, depending, then administer bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply the ointment cure to form flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called “epiglottis” be cut; and one does not help with those, because all the veins and the prominences of the patient are at those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in 2 almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the prominence, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below III circles or IV a small fissure through the, between II circles or by the quantity of the fissure of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and these are so suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long of it.  
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the whole neck, then fends the throat until it comes to the windpipe; and escape the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the phlegm of the windpipe which jumps out from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed for which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew together alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one does not do this juice until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to death, and the fault the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death; and for this, ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and well that it had not wounded a vein nor been led except by the throat, and the veins were exiting through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I bandaged it, and thus I treated the wound, until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maiden except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; therefore I say that in cutting into the epiglottis there should be no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a vein, and it is mostly in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; the natural one has no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to fat to us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not come together to work of doing outside than in this which is small, and prove it and seek throughout the intruder: if you find it as I say fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as one cuts the fat, and treat it all its head, if there is any; and surround well soon, and cure it as it comes together, until it be perfectly healed. 
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are to us, of which I will say all the appearances; and now it befits that I say all the difference that is between ours and that which is issued. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is sometimes accompanied by fever and heat, as long as the fever has passed and putrefaction is complete, then rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new ones there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the substance which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a blister, and becomes large; and there are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and much of color as I said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the care of the wound, that you feel and inquire first of all the instrument which is called “entromissoire,” according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of the incision of the abscesses from us is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer, and take care that what will jump.  
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, do it as I said about other abscesses; and if after the introducer none comes moisture, know that it is fatty, so do it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and scrape it lightly on each side and keep the coat where it lies so that you draw it healthy with the outside; and if you can't draw it healthy, then draw it piece by piece so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it stays there nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a bit, and the wound does not grieve him, apply powders corrosive acute to the wound, and strain the wound, and put above things soothing plasters hot, and cure of other cures until it is healed; and if the swelling is great, stitch the two lips of the wound, and cure of those who generate flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beating is contrary to you or another urgent matter and you apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, as long as the wound weeps, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to covering those that are remaining from the other.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the introits instruments, and are of III manners: great and middle and small; and there is III squares which are called «albaret», and I which is called «breb», and there is of III manners: great, middle, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula; and are also like the needles with which one sews the sorcerers, and are of citrine copper, or iron, or silver, and most worthy those that are yellow, and are more proven by black pitch to surround the fissures of fistula; and are of III manners: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the openings. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the forceps are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are forceps that have II curves of III manners also; and there are forceps that have III curves, and are also of III manners; and there are forceps that have II curves, and forceps of one curve only, and are of III manners; and all these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these are trenching tools, and there are some that do not cut more than one way, with which we scrape the flesh, so that one does not wound the vein or nerve; and of these instruments are the lancets reposed in handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only in flesh places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groin, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling fisticuffs scrapes, according to this form, with which one drains blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it never in the place that is healthy to cut open the veins, and arteries, and never around according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they appear like breasts of women; and they remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should follow this form from this line .b. up to .g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound, preventing flesh from growing, then assemble the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; if the wound grows downward and becomes enlarged as women's do, make two incisions on the ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed; if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous nodules that have crusts, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore who contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g. 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as before until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofulas, then make it as we have said in opening scrofulas, and if the wound reenters the fold, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin that is above it is sewn together, often abscesses come; and just as much it happens to an inflamed vein and abscess; and if one knows this well for the artery, then the abscess extends longer; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel tightening; and when it is for the vein, it appears red swollen; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, even when it is under the shoulders and elbows and neck and in many other places, and it is very large.   
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is then necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and the one who is chief must also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen of artery making from above the skin of the long; then work the size as incisions, and depart beautifully the artery from the cloths, until it is uncovered; then put under the one a needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in II leagues, according to that which I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in temples; then point the place which is between the II links of an introducer as long as the blood which is there comes out, and be clean the abscess; then administer the cure that generates bowe, until the lien chills; then cure those of ointment coming to these, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, it is necessary that you tie with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have I double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or link of one of II parts as II chies of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads are not coming out, so put another needle to all I thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and restrain the threads in IIII leagues; then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity of the keur and leave those who are tied; then put on I drapeil moilliet in wine and oil, then administer him cures of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are bruised, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all their parts where there are joints, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain; and when one restrains it, then the patient feels pain, and it is not well within the body, but below the heart; and moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go contraction; and the one that is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin to the spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, and flay it, then scrape out the pus and sew up the wound, and treat it until it is healed.  
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its appearance like mushrooms, and the roots are subtle, and the heads are large; and there are some small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and they were slightly split, and pus flowed out of them.  
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the works on incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if it cuts with the spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to the fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the hip there come often too great hemorrhages of blood, and if the bleeding does not stop, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, take a thread of linen well made, and tie it with the limb as we have said, and let him wear it for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the linen thread until it has closed the limb, and dries by itself without labor; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut all at once for fear of the belly, but you can well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not re-open; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not cut the thread which is of pale color and of poor sense and of milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the cure of ulcers after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound has become
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the skin, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as they happen in other sores, or of blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness; and if it is from the rupture of the skin and the exit of the boil, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse issues. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is because of the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its edges, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is tightened, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and for strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses thick and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you see whether its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So you must leave the cure. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, then it behooves you to command the patient to hold his arm, and be outstretched straight, then seize all around the boil; then command him to grasp firmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the entire incision; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let it be bound well; then work the half of the abscess extended on the ligature, and put your index finger, and feel the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligature, then untie it, and put the intestine out from the inside of the belly; and if you find the boil, then take it at the incision, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go well around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II threads through them, and put the II needles around what you have made in a cross that you make perceptible; then strain the abscess in IV places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it will ripen, and let the dead matter discharge by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and ripened, then cure it as it is necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is necessary, and close the place. 
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work on them by medicines, and how one must shun the cure of iron; and let us say the ulcer is born in the marrow, and great caution to be had in its cure, and they said the ancients that when an ulcer is in a place where one can shave it like an ulcer which is in the nipples, and in the groin, and similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never been able to cure any of them; nor has anyone else ever cured any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then let him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient .i. a good place to do the work; then cut your incisions or ulcers, and shave the hair on all sides, and the bone on all sides leaving nothing; and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the running of blood goes contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched; then cure it further until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; thus it is illuminated only; and one must not touch iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy that is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, look at whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and flux of the belly and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must do this: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the hip, then take the spinous spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be trenchant of the two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	at the point, and all way that it may not be so deeply inserted that it can come to the intestine when one inserts it; and do not let it bleed; then see if the dropsy is located toward the intestines: If so, you should make an incision below the ribs III on the right; and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the rib III; and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right, and do not let the patient lie on the incision that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bring it up, and raise your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the fascia as much as when you are scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or less; then pierce the fascia until the spatula comes to the vein, and this is the point of the fluid; then draw out the fluid, and insert this instrument from there which is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver dog, and it is of iron or an archot lighter, and in the part below I have a small hole; and one side costs III holes; and II on the other side, and I on the other; and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen. 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, because if you empty more than it is due in this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart which stops the opening that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering that, and treat from the point a little quantity; do this each day, and guard yourself from overflowing until there remains no more than a drop of point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him much water, so cure him with earth or sand hot, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and keep him from drinking; and cure him with medicines drying until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	At no time are children born who do not have a hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, he must immediately perceive to all the spatula very subtly according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or pertu the clo subtil of plonc, and tie it and hold it so III days or IIII and when he wants to make urine, let the clo be removed, and make urine, and then put it back; and by adventure it does not come off at all, for the urine that comes out will not leave it closed.  
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, if it is medicated with the cloth of plantain, as we have said, then it will widen.  
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the penis in their place are pale, because none are born with the penis at the head of the shaft, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a serious illness. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, then they place the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were the width of a pen, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and beware of blood loss which comes many times, and if it happens, then the stanch from those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the member
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come this blemishes in the member, and is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with .i. one sharp needle, and scrape and clean all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color and pus, then you must bring a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the bandage is in some part within the hair and part without, then it befits that you remove the bandage which is within first; and when it is soldered, then cure the outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, be sure that the head of the shaft is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shaft and where the anus; so it behoves to remove all that is black and corrupt, then put upon it the poultice of honey and flour which is made from the bark of quince trees and chickpeas, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two conditions together: that is to say, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert or lead a chain of wool into the penis, and urinate the patient among; and when the skin is tight at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there are wounds or abscesses, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a pointed instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is free from all sides; and if it is a painful thing to consider this, it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula any point at the head of the penis and of the skin; then separate well between the two, and put in the subtle linen cloth moistened in cold water, that it does not tighten again.  
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this operation by our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the easiest to heal.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the healers who made circumcision about one and a half, and with force, and with a whole novacule; so they cut the skin because there are two skins, and by adventure if one cuts the top and leaves the bottom.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is necessary to cut, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is about one and a half, the point of the member is not safe; and at the purification of the angle by adventure escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with force to all the length of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, so that it is equally sized in I [word unclear], but that the filaments are well placed within the skin; and so that the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only making them tie the filament around the rod only, then let them enjoy themselves in every way that you can; then let them be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then bring your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and move it upwards until the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well of the filth which is assembled there, then tie its place with a double thread, then tie it below I poc to the other lien; and hold it as II do by the second lienure at the pouch and at the index finger, and cut between the II liens, then lift the heart upwards gently and move the head of the rod; then let blood run drop by drop, for that is the cure; and put powder on and over the powder I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit with oile roset boin and fres, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it of other cures until it is healed. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces to the mundification is this: the two shoulders should be held and be pointed, and the shoulders are also as large as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the pus makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you hold it with tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pierce for three days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, let it alone until the abscesses are calmed, and lightly scar it; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will do it no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts the kernel beyond measure, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is from the stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention by the stone which is in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, for which reason the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called 'syringe', for this is its form: and let it be of fine silver, light-headed, like the feather of a bird; and let the tail be one palm long and a half, and let it be fine at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the head I piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the body; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order for that that which conducts or where it goes is twisted; then keep the thread all wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make the correction of the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient be aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	Of the bladder illnesses
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or there is rottenness assembled, and you see distilled water and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called “clepsydre”, and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the leus chevez because the medicine is such that it stops the rod well without addition, if one can drain the moisture, and put out when it is necessary; and when you want to place your medicines in the bladder, put the chief dou keusteur in the moisture, and draw with the drawing tube which is inside; if you draw the moisture to the kesteur, and then firmly push back the drawing tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: so it is here.  
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and below to the chest where the linen falls; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture that you see to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and warm the part with that moisture on the fire; then insert the end of the clyster into the anus, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that that moisture has arrived at the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly in the center; then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do like you have done with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have just said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a cutting tool; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens more frequently to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears with gravel, and irritates the patient's penis, and he feels pain many times, and then urinates; and after many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in the elderly, and is as moderate for those who are between young and old; and the cure is lighter from those who have a large stone than from those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by clyster, to draw out all the filth which is in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he encumbers at times to seek the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and unbuckle and move them down so that the stone descends to the middle of the bladder, and it comes out once from its place; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then push and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall upon touching all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and put it in its base, and feel the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your finger, and put it out towards where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the scrotum in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatula cutting downwards, for this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And place between those who are between the buttocks and the base, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be right on top of the stone, and your two sides should be either base or foundation, and let the waist be like a cross so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; by chance the press so the two that are base or foundation, that it jumps out without work; and know that there is such a stone where it has angles, and margins: so it is hard to insert; and if it is like those that are below, resembling a gland, and round, whose exit is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To this one then where it has angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not jump, it is necessary that you extract it with pliers which are also like a file at the head, in order to force extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge the hole of the wound, and if there is no cutting, strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the trail further, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.  
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be sown, and make a greater wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the leys cannot sew; but nonetheless force yourself to pull it out, or to break it with pliers, until you pull it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top a bandage moistened in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then set the patient back on his neck, and do not untie the band until the third day.  
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphana and basil oil, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosion, and blood clot in the bladder, and due to this, the urine is held back, which is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore, you must put in the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and burn it; then raise the wound of water and ease and silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it behooves that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck there, and urine cannot issue; so the cure of this that I say thus, that you may cut it many times, and excuse the cutting by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested this thusly. 
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this form and have it shaped into three angles on a stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the forefinger into the shaft lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the finger in the stone, poke and poke, until you can feel the stone on the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is then broken and thrown out with the urine, and the patient heals; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and the other above, then make the rod right on the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that a stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is a grievous cure, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who discovers herself to the midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deep than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and with pains one finds her, and if you do not find one, point so much as to cast mire subtly; and present him with a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the inquiry of the stone; and look well that the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her buttocks or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she confines it below her buttocks, and recommends to her that she put her buttocks or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder up to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the buttock, where it is seen to be appeared, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move its two parts above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small; then put the bottom into the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can possibly go out, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins.  
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities to know the outcome.  
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the vein holds, put on vitriol ground, and hold it an hour until the vein is hardened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work; and if the vein fails, and it is from the artery that was cut, put the powder on the place and restrain it with strips and bandages, and do not restart those, and leave the stone and do not milk it, lest the patient die; then cure the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the wounds are healing, then return to your work as long as the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is under the skin of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have any other poc.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is of weakness that comes to the testicles, and it is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the bones, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, I poc long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the bones, because it has moisture all around.  
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then the abscess is reamed with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another yolk; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white silk, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you expect at all the intropositor quarrel, from which its form is before. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something a little high, and puts under him many cloths; then sits on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides; then take the spatula light, and cut the skin of the sides among them until below the armpit, and be your cut straight dividing the skin of the sides up to the white fascia, and the eschar gently according to your power; then pierce the white fascia full of water at the wide opening, and extract all the water, and then put your dressings, and extend the fascia upwards; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the fascia; cut all or in pieces equally the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return the water; and if the work has been well done by you, put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the two leaves of the ribs at a seam, then cure it like other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the uvula corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the tonsil to the whole suspension, and remove the uvula, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part as you did the first evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen swab half soaked in rose oil; and put outside another linen swab half soaked in wine and oil, and put above the two pads, and put a doubled cloth on top, and tie it above the whole band according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use them of wool batting according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the heads pinches above the foundation to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and the other of the chief above the two angles, and let all be assembled the restraint in the buckle of the brazier; and sometimes is medicine this ramification of cautery in place of a blade of iron, and it is that you pinch the knife cauterization subtle, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white substance that contains the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that substance at once, and scorch it with this subtle cautery hot: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you reach everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more safe; and move guardians of bleeding, and moves that the works of size; and if nothing does to you contrary, or abscesses or bleeding or other thing, so cure what does you contrary, according to what is before said.  
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, so administer a perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said that watery root is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below throughout all the spatula wide, and put the perforation through the length of the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and leave to drain the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must put a pen or instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, of which the form is mentioned above; and enlarge the hole of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it assembles after six months or until then, and when it is assembled like before, then the patient will pass his days. 
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many positions, so it seems to me that one should leave it; and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body, and even the buttocks; and this is by much cause.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by superfluity sour and acute, which is spread to the veins, or from percussion; and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by adventure are some abscesses grievous fearful and stony, and of dark color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from inflammation of vein.  
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When this is by an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the inflation of vein is known by his disposition to the expression of touch of the two, and one can well make the cut on this resemblance, and on the other chariots; and that you chop the heart of the coins, then the egg is on top, and the train is further from the white so much, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.  
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these new vessels, then it behooves you to draw out the egg and its yolk; and if it is stuck in the stomach or in what is within the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver that entire membrane, and roundly cut it. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the bone is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a  sponge, with the softening of the boils, and the patient moves gruffly when he goes; and the cure of this disease is as scary as before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the loins down to your thighs, at all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters tie them, and stretch them; then cut with the sharp spatula wide through the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then put a needle where there is the double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and drain the corrupted moistors; then cure the wound as the others where one incurs a bow, so that no vessel drips which nourishes one of the loins; for by this there comes no evil, and if to all the vessels comes blood, it is necessary to drain the loins to all the vessels; so that the members do not lose their nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are by the section that comes or there it is extended on the belly in the part of the angles, for that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners; and this rupture is either where the hernia is, or from the extension of it, and come these two ways of bad of causes: or percussion, or jump, or brays, or lifting of heavy weights, and by similar things; and the signs when it is the extension of the hernia are that it happens slowly and slowly, and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess even up to the navel, for that the hernia presses on the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when this is of the section of the gut, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess appears diverse, beneath the skin close, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the gut.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the bowels with the intestine, and are held in, and causes great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, for that reason it behooves to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to bring the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it; then support it on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips; then hold the heart above, and cut all the skin of the groin from the long side; then put inside the folds of the waist spines according to what you need to open the wound, and such that blood may issue; then scrape the subcutaneous fat which is under the skin of the groin, until the white fat is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger into that which follows the groin, into that which is between the white fat which is under the skin of the abdomen, and between the second fat, and depart from what is behind the abdomen, and between the second fat; and then move with your right hand inside the heart of the groin, and hold the white fat on top to your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the abdomen upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and examine with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped or white fat hard, and if you find any of these things, put it back into the belly; then take a needle which has a large thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the chies that appear from the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the fat, about which we have said that it is under the skin of the groin, with a strong thread of II parts; then wrap the chies of the threads, and tie them together in II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inwards, except an abscess may come; and put the thread straight according to the first long thread II fingers of it, and after these II threads leave the fat which is under the heart of the groin the size of a finger; and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the groin, as much as the sinew, and the bowel, as we have said before; then put moistened wool in oil, and put it into the wound, and put the thread that we have said.  
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is cauterized the white buttocks that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of excessive blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the linen be left until it dries; and if it delays in drying, so it is rinsed with hot water, and put up as we have said, until it dries; then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.  
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vis, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of him who operates, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	At no time comes rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and opens the lesions; and do not insert any of the intestines into the openings, and if there are inserted, it is little, and repairs all hours; and yet, if it remains too long in this point, it grows the wound or syphilis, until the intestine is inserted; and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis that is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and inflated the lesions and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and at no time is cured by iron in this manner: and is that the patient lies sideways on his back between your hands, then cut the lesion of the rupture inflated with the width according to the quantity of III fingers; and then extract the syphilis which is under the skin that it has, then take the rait and put it on the place apparent of the syphilis; and press it to the bottom of the belly, then sew the II lesions appearing of the syphilis above the head of the rait, and sew one and the other; then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut any of the syphilis nor extend the weft or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramice of the intestines; then cure by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, purify and care for the wound, until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sfaca is constrained, and has no appearance in the break, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the sacs that are inside are softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips to a seam, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat the cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the confinement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterizations are common in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one of which is that the doctors should be able to answer when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other because we often need cauterization of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us seat the beast in hot water, until the joints are softened and pliable; then grasp them with your hand, so long as they are set and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of the tail: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press its skin of the buttocks with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut above each orifice in a cut, when you will have well scorched them; and leave no prick of the syfac and the subtle syfac which is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction it happens sometimes that nothing remains of the buttocks, because the beast desires lust; then care for the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as men: the one if it is between the two genitals opens as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short it urinates.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and above the dagger also as a staff and they couple.  
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of man and woman is that you cover all the stitched wounds, and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	Of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wart is a bump raised on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as big as a hand, and that is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the wound with your hand or fingers, and gently cleanse it; and do not scrape too vigorously, lest bleeding occur, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed; and on another sore that arises at the mouth of the ear, and the temple, and by chance jumps out, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease." 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the tendon, and care for it until it is healed.  
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and is natural by birth, or accidents by disease that has come to it; or it is by a charmed thing, or by subtle or thick syfac, and is made in the mars, or in the ribs, or under, or wherever; and defents the conception, and the childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the gaze of the belly.  
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stopping is near appearing, so whether to your two or the thigh. 
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is dou syfac subtle, and it is near the II books, then hurry, and do this: put your II thumbs together, and the woman be on her back, with her legs spread apart; then hold the II books, so that the subtle syfac be round, and cover the openings; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lie the woman down so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stoppage is of flesh, then suspend it with a cord and cover it; and take medicines to staunch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, along with honey of egg; then administer a poultice of broad plantain, so that the wound may not close; and thus be prolonged, and administer a linen tent, dry. Then be cured with other cures until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a new birth, it should be covered according to this manner, if it is not boils that are festering.  
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess which is on the mare, one must not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure.  
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the piles, when they are driven into the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, except by the cure with iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then is the altar held by pliers, and the head cut at its roots, then powder of restraining medicines such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and she confides with honey and ease, and with it I make a plaster on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays still, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this is not the case, then apply suction cups to the back and breasts without hurting; then take linen, and moisten it in juice of plantain or juice of elderberry with old wine, and apply it to the place.  
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, care for its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to the sharp chief, so it must be covered as I said in the previous text; and then the cure until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the margin
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many manners of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancres and fiery abscesses and herpes and estiomes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more other diseases that I have said in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of fire, look at whether the abscess is warm at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let him rest until the pain is appeased; and then have the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he leans, and support his back and bring together his legs at the parts away from the leg; and let his hips be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good linen bandage; then push him towards the right side, and there administer the instrument which is used to work the mouth of the jawbone, for this comes after with the form; and it is necessary that when you see administering this instrument, you insert the point first in order to know the depth of the jawbone, so that what goes into the instrument does not go further than it should, and that it does not damage the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the jawbone with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it soft with their hand, then it is proper to cover it at the chief, at the spatula left; and when the bowel is emptied, then it is proper that you put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in green oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the edge of the marsh, and put over the marsh and over the knife with a clean cotton net moistened in water or mallow are cooked; then cure after II days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is healed; and at no time raise the marsh and the wound by clyster of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and lungwort are cooked; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set back into the flesh, then it befits you to guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The first thing is to the midwife that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs of it are when you see the woman push down, and desire to smell her rear; then haste the child to be born by force; therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the head first, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child comes quickly; because when he comes out on his head, then the second one comes with him, and the mother is relieved of her superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes to be above the body or shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes upon its belly, or loin, and is turned by chance upon its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary that the healer be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes on its head by natural birth, and the woman giving birth groans loudly, and the strength of her is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs with the little spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the secondine, and cut at its nail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and take hold of the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her take and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so now will come the child. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are issued, it is necessary that you put them back gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on the seat, and raise her feet up; then tilt the seat to the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the tilting; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the neck which is before put in, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on its feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, it is necessary to push upwards; and then turn it back and forth, until it is equal; then pinch its feet and extend them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Let him jump up to his hips, if he is ordered to take, and let him make it sneeze with the condition; if he jumps higher, God willing.  
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily set.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take muscillage of altee, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a warm bath until below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make a collar of mirr, and put it below, and let her lie for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and gently take hold of her belly, for the child will now jump.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, she puts her hands palm to palm; then it is supported on its neck, and its feet are hung down, and it lies on the bed; and she folds her hands palm to palm, and then takes hold of the hands above the belly, and removes the cushions below, until it is prepared downwards; and if the child does not jump, she takes its feet and moves them gently, then moves the belly upwards, then puts her hands; and she moves the child palm to palm; and commands the woman that she must prepare herself as long as the child issues. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child which comes out with one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed and straighten her legs; then administer the poultice that I have recounted; and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on the stool, then study to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to the natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to keep straining as long as the child is coming out. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child upon its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the knight holds his hand, then turn it back and forth, and lightly; and when it is equalized, he places on its natural muscle of elevation and oil, as we have said, then he commands her to move back and forth; and when you have done this, place her on her seat, and command that she squeeze; and she will sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner to all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner to the whole secondine, so cut the secondine at your finger, until the moistors are emptied; and if the child can rest on his face and on his neck, then cut from the hood, that it be not held back, and kill the child; then put the child inside, as long as you have put it as it should, and command the woman to avoid any time: then she will lie lightly. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the separation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things and do not live, if they can be named; I know these, that they are multiplied, and are detached by the nature that divides them, which is attached to the bud; and sometimes they go out as naturally as all others, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out strongly, then the care as we have said, and let the  bail be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make so as it is worth moves to salvation. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marsh I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because by chance some things happen; so do according to what is necessary. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death; so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister the braid from two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with mullein of altee and fenugrec and linseed, then oil her hands with these oils and these mulleins; then put them in the womb gently, then want the place where she puts the instruments to be suitable to those, and take guard if the fetus is appeared that it descends on its head; so put the instruments in her eyes or her neck or her mouth or in her palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, then put it either with a knife and at the middle of the ribs; and it is necessary that he holds the instrument in his right hand, and puts the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and puts it to all his hand gently, and puts the instrument in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then fit the two ends together, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then move them equally in one direction and the other, to see if they fit, and let the ends be toothed to hold them together, as is the form here.  
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains there, then seize the bail with some of its oil, and place it in that part, and draw the other part; and if none remain there, then put this one-chine or higher up, and do this until he pushes out all of them. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, then you must wrap it on the drapelet, until it is whole; then cut into the joint of the sole or at the knife, and thus you must do in the other hand, and as II feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the opening, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your two fingers and make the point and extract the sharpness; or you will use the instrument which is called "almidach," so that its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way do the same if the child has a large head naturally; and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps out and it is forced, then split it, as long as the moisture which is or worse at the issue; and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the delivery through the mouth of the womb is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is in the belly or the breast, it is necessary that you extract it to the cloth wrapped around the hand; and make the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture that is there cures; and if the other members are pulled out, and the head remains, then put the bail with his hand into the marrow, and lead it up to the mouth of the marrow; then put in the needle or II, and lead it further; and if the mouth of the marrow is retracted by the abscess that has come, it does not need to be worked on, but moist and fatty things must be administered; and administer plasters, and siece in soft and moisturizing water. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said in a living child; and if one cannot do so, then the body be treated by parts, and leave nothing of the spine. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it comes to boils, those that come in the marsh; and if blood discharge comes, then put it on sharp wine restraining, and administer other remedies. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived one other upon that, and refused death the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time there came an abscess in the belly, and inflamed so much that it opened, and began to great suppuration.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there came out one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed greatly, for this reason because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I saw the wound, and in treating the bones, until the woman was in a better point; and she lived long time so, and it rose again a little bit of bone from its place; and I do not remember this chapter for except that when the master finds a strange thing, that he should know how to help.  
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the presser, which is what we have in the books; and to two turns at two shoulders of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft I must be wide, and the margin of the trees I must, and long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same shaft, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pliers; and it has two heads with adjustments, as you see, an arm long, and two wide; and when you see opening the mouth with the entire instrument, so have the woman sit on the bed, her feet dangling and her legs open, then put the two adjusters together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all surmounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirror shows them well, so much more hasty is the work, and higher as to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despise the instrument that you have not shown it well, because its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the patient to retain her arm, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well is it. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not so, take a pot and make it pierced or covered, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot in the mouth of the marsh, and the other chief in the mouth of the marsh, and keep it until the vapors come inside the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said.  
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one sneezes hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more strength, command the midwife that she moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in mucus of aloe, and then put it into the nature, and pull the second one; and when she will have found it, she grasps it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the thread does not fall during the extraction; but there it must be moved lightly to right and left, and then pull; if it comes and becomes unstuck. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marsh is tight shut, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not of all that we have said, so guard that you do not use the teat; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then clistet her with ointment tetrapharmakon; if she will bear it and put it back, and come forth; but nevertheless, when she bears it, it comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and bleaches the sick. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary then fumigations suitable to this: none of the ancients have experienced the use of fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument for which one uses to fumigate the woman in order to hold back the flowers and the second-born is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire; and let the fumigation over the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burnt, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	To examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a piercing of the foundation, but they have been stopped by subtle sutures: so it is necessary for the midwife that she pierce that suture with her right tool and not pierce it with an acute spatula; and guard the wound so that she does not touch it; then put soft linen moistened in wine and oil on it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.  
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it doesn't close up again, then put a piece of cloth there, and leave him for five days, and remove it when the child wants to go into other rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes from a swelling of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that swelling; if it be cured, as we have said of the cautery of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and larger ones that come from near the foundation outside, or in the space between the two parts, if it is a fistula or several; and when this nodule is old, it works, and even moist moisture white or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who have them or by ejection or airiness when the patient defecates, and perhaps one jumps. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to a point of the groin.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the base, and not passing through; and it is that you put your right index or base, and thrust a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has tortuosity, there you put a tent of fine lead, or horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your point; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from the opening or windiness or blood, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urinary duct, if it leaks urine and cannot be closed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to the place; if there is no twisting and invention of pain around the spot, it is that there is a bow here, and there is no medicine or treatment by ointment; and in these fistulas piercing there is no cure except labor, and vanity of fools who intervene. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is neither recent nor old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of linen, or of wool if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you should put your index finger there, so that you feel when it tugs; and be uncovered or you feel between your finger the syfac or flesh, then you know that it is pierced; if you do not work on it one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says that one can cure well none, but this happens little; and the help that one makes, if it is well-cauterized according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and it puts all hot into the fistula, until it comes close to the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charlatans are burned, which are like an owl's feather; and then the cure with damp tents in butter, as long as those chars exit, then the cure with ointment encircling flesh and soldering. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If so he is well, good. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is to be healed otherwise it cannot be cured; and if the probe goes in between and does not reach the point which is the foundation, and between your finger and the probe a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula after the covering of the heart; so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward the probe before the tent, and then the cautery afterward, until it reaches the head of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and it will fall away; then destroy those fleshy formations that seem like a feather of an owl, and nothing remains of them.  
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sin goes taut, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery assembles II good things: that is to say, the burning of these attached hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of wet bandages in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the hairs are burned in the wound; then cure the wounds of the eyes with hard dried dressings, and they are the dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to the very bottom and is separated from the body, you put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between it is the cloth or the syfac or chars, or where it is near to pierce, if there is no other way but by faith and hope, by the administration of one of the III manners: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as first; and do not go too deep in advance, that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and come the excretions by its will; then cure it, as we have said; perchance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the world once she is cut from the bottom, or by tent or by another appointed instrument; then clean the char fault which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation: it will be a lighter thing for the patient.  
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is near to the foundation of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: 
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it puts one twist of thread into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the base inside, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, as if you were pushing your hand or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and bind one to another, and leave it for a day or two; and restrain it at no time, until the threads have cured those scars which are between two, and fall off; then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make a stitch closure if it is too deep, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the pointed spatula with which one makes the fistula is very much so, on one side and cut; and on the other side not, for that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here.  
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are according to II manners: or they are inside the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, they are blood, and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture, and in addition, or a little of citrine water or a little of blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation is that you order the patient to stretch for them to go into chambers, as long as the foundations rise from him, and the threads appear; then hurry, and the can take with tongs, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots; and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with the cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, and put hot powders on them that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure the other cures until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot rise, then give the patient a harsh and sharp enema to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient is sick, and if the threads are outside the foundation, the cure is lighter; and it is that you take them with your finger or with tongs, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.  
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so be of the wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood; then put on top of the foundation a cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on top of the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rests; and then let him rest until it dries, and when they are dry, cure them with ointment and other cures, until it is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Of the drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there occurs drying of the veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not leave it moist; then treat it until it is healed as it should; and if it cannot heal, begin scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and is scraped; then treat it until it is healed.  
dou fremit	about trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance false near the body, and it goes much in through it; and sometimes it finds them cold, and feels like dead frost, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than other parts. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a thread from a goose feather, or a very strong vulture feather, and put that thread on the boil, until the purple circle touches the boil all around; then turn your hand over the whole thread until you cover the whole boil, and put it in the center, and pull out the boil by its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so do this of a hound's of iron or iron according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Nor let it pierce, for to keep the two, and move pressing And if you see, so cauterize the fringe, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is a clyster made of silver or brass, or molten iron or mesh; and never is it made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then who are administered in the care of children and who are feeble and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a detachment where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced inside; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one; and the belly is where one puts the medicines of an animal bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there is a space of I, then put in these holes I strong thread of twisted thread in X or whichever way around, and assemble the belly like a kid; and when the medicine is inside, tie the opening before with a strong thread, then do a clyster; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And be the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the chief of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes the ministers with his two hands together, until it is all wet, then extract the clyster, and raise the legs of the patient to the side, and if the medicine wants to issue, so let it go as much as it can; and if he sleeps one whole night, then it is more help.  
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him an enema for the disease of a falling belly, and the medicine is eager to work, let him restart it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are either at the base or an abscess, so be it the enema as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema upon which the skin is held.  
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things by which wounds are made are by cutting of stone, and sword-making and knife, or lance or shaft or stake, or similar things; which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with wounds of the simple head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.  
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or chief, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it is of kidney stone or similar things, and the skin is immediately broken and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly an abscess hot: so do immediately bleed from the cephalic even if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bleeding on the contrary of the swollen part; and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be less abundant, and drink no wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no abscess, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved by the air, put on some ointment, until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then assemble them with stitches, as I shall say for the wounds of the belly, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to bone, and it holds only at one point, then cover it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as beef and wheat cooked, also poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a rotting skin and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut off all the rot and throw away the pus, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put in this powder which heals as soon as the arsenic has been applied.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood II parts; quicklime III parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and keep it fastened, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no times is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the ash has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has moved the wound, even if it is in this way, then do not put on any of this powder; but put some softened dressings, or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey, until it lies soft; then cure with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other thing than to let the cure, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as chalks washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucum washed also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so stitch it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is cut and full of bowe, then pierce or lower down; and if the artery is cut, and there is bleeding, then stop it, and tie, and cauterize if necessary is; and if the windpipe of the throat is cut, or the reins, and the conduct is kept, by which the meat goes, then sew the heart above the neck of the throat, and touch not the throat but put it back according to its natural figure; and then bind firmly, and leave it for some days, then cure with ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then take it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then pull them all out as you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave them until the wound suppurates, and be clear and align the issue; and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a sword or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then consider if from the wound there is an escape of wind as the patient breathes: understand then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put anything in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not clot, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put there an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart nor strangling of breath; and when you see good dispositions, understand that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat therefore with tents and other treatments, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, and works, afterwards know that there is a fistula; then treat the fistula as one should.  
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the back, then the cure of those who are in front; if it is large, sew it; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into bone, and has broken pieces, then clean the wound, and take out the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound rot, so that it will release the extractions; and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	Of the derangement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	A rupture of the abdomen is great and medium and small; sometimes from a large wound, the intestine or nerve of the intestines bursts out, which makes intromission difficult; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because we put the intestines back in more carefully, unless we put them back hot on hot; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, and go back in with more difficulty, and for that reason, a medium-sized wound is worse, because of this, you must put the intestine back in its place than the others. And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to four ways: the two common sutures happen in the suture of the abdomen, and the sutures of other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds; and all the same they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one by one and declare. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has come out, and it seems like something to put back, it is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or soft cloth with hot water only, or you cook in hot wine, squeezing and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and sometimes do this restraining it, and make it move only as to deflate.  
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or alcohol and mallows be cooked, for by this is aligned the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument of which one chops hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that tail, that no one should cut it except great necessity there is; and this is the instrument for splitting: so cut inside in the curve and outside no, and see here the form. 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has jumped out, put it back in place according to the natural form in its proper place, if you have the ability, because this is good for healing. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put the head and hip higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to what the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you must administer what I say in large and medium wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Small wounds are put together as you have seen it, then take in your hands the minister pitiful which holds all the tearing to its hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitches, and is that you prick an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space, and there pierce a needle where it has the good strong thread; and pierce the two chiefs of the skin with the two chiefs of the syphac, which is below the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that side, and assemble the two chiefs of the syphac together; then the strain of a double thread around the needle of the two parts, then assemble the two chiefs of the wound evenly, and then leave a space, and there pierce another needle; then tie the thread as you have done the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need needles, until all the wound is constrained; and let the needles be medium, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be medium; and it is not necessary to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the soldering; and then cut the ends of the needles, so that they do not prick the patient when sleeping, and put tents or drapes at the ends of the needles for muffle and hold them, and leave them until the wound is soldered; and this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because there suffice a needle or two for the second stitch. It is common, and is that you assemble the two chiefs of the skin and the two chiefs of the syphac together with a needle where it has the medium strong thread; and when you have pierced these chiefs altogether, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews the drapes; and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a finger's width; this stitch serves the man, and I sewed a wound on a man’s belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was from the intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been gone for twenty-four hours, and the wound closed up until the fifteenth day, and I cured him, and he was healed.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mire had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicine; and I put more sense above the wound cotton old II times a day, and I washed it with water of honey until he was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the II proper manners of stitching: take the needle, and put it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the core straight on straight, lay the point of the thread where you have put the needle, or stitched, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitch is that you stitch as the furrier makes the pelts, and that you leave once the thread on one side, and take it back on the other, until the stitch is completely finished. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, that the Galicians say properly, is like any font, which assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one chief of the syfac to the other chief, in such a manner: stitch an needle or chief of the mirach prochiene, and make it pierce that place alone, and leave the two chiefs of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part unto that within, at the two chiefs of the syfac; then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part unto that within, in two other chiefs of the mirach that are on the other side; and this is the middle manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galians thus says this word, and no one testifies it, one must sew the belly with II needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than the others places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgements of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh in all its blood, just as long as the arrow has moved it, so put back the intestine, and the cut; then put on powder containing resin, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound bows; and tighten the thread, and be joined the sifac, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, so put on, immediately when it begins to dry, old cotton, and move it II times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or rot in the bowels, and this happens often, then give enemas of black wine, and also if the rot comes to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the location of the veins in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the sinew jumps from the wound, put it back as if the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become black or gray, then you must tie the black part so that bleeding does not come from there because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the two bones, and place the two heads hanging from below the wound side outwards to align the extraction when the sinew falls, and the wound closes.  
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I saw a man who was wounded or belly of a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was infected and became a fistula, and in this there was defecation and flatulence; I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to suture until he was healed, and the ends joined.  
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewn together, I feared that the patient had a bad thing in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take two strips of cloth with large heads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the strip covers the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it strains its mouth upward; and then cut the head, and this holds so that he cannot untie it, then put another strip after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.  
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief if it is burned in the intestine and no nuisance comes to the patient, and one can bind the intestine of a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that it be very cleansed, and then tie to the head of this thread the thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and wind it in the rupture; and this manner of sewing of fringes is not worse than according to the way of hope and confidence; and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, there is nothing nor safety, except subtlety.   
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is closed and retracted inwards.  
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth knotty false hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also raised like the plume of a bird; and sometimes in clear bowel, and other times thick; sometimes thin, and other times enough; and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only by one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, that does not allow flesh to be born; or there is too much bowel; or the matter is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and inflamed by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it behooves me to make you know the cure for fistula which is done by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so on that comes to the property of the main member, and to similar ones. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grief cure, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come up to where I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to know it, then take a tent of rain or iron, if the fistula is straight, so it is desired; and if the fistula is crooked, so it is surrounded by a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends well around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot surround it well with tents, then clench it by one of the openings, because the moisture is passed from one opening to another, and it cleanses it; then desire it sagely according to your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is covered in depth, and ask the patient well of the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, so cut according to what I have said, and remove the fault and the corrupted parts that are inside; then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, then you must cut in depth, as much as you can, then put moistened tents in medicinal water, and put them to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is at the bottom; then put ointment in healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by these means, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then wash the wound as long as the corruption is completely removed, then cure with things that help the flesh as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns back as before, know that you are not yet finished: If it is uncovered and you wish to reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus healthy, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too far along, that you cannot arrive at it; if there is nothing else than to let nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with tweezers, if the instrument suitable for this is used, and if there are many bones, then extract them all, not leaving any one; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.  
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something preventing rot, and let it until the flesh around the bones is rotten, and then they will have more easily the bones; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, so let it rest only the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the flesh of the bone; so it should be cleaned and covered until the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to the man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and had no outward cause to open; but the healers by their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they corroded much of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all rotted and moisture from the body; and many healers treated it for about 2 years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what corroded through the openings a great deal; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellow color.  
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of these pits, and then searched all the pits, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore began and dug into one of the wounds until I discovered part of the bone, and I found it decayed and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inner bone; I saw what appeared to me of the decayed bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I tried to suture the place; but I could no more than I dug around a palm of the bone, and the traied was all its length, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healed and joined quickly, and it did not need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the evacuation of blood it often happens, but he was healed entirely, and there was born in place of the bone a hard cartilage, and was of good disposition and had no pain or contrary to all in all, neither at walking nor coming. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a linen cloth, and strain it to the head of the bone that opens, and command someone to extend it upward; and put another linen cloth thicker than the first linen, and tie it above the flesh which is above the bone, and stand the head so that you may draw the corrupt flesh downward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you wish to be, so that the bone does not break the flesh; and put a splint or a piece of wood under the bone to move the corrupt flesh; and it should be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and do it again. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the rot is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put the tinder below, and then take it from one part to the other the corruption, and let the thread be as long as the corruption's point, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and take the bone where it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to do but to cut; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the finger of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opens for you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you; and know that the instruments to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to equip oneself with each kind of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so think about the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.  
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can be injured by internal or external causes; and when you have treated the decay with medicines, and they are of no use, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the decay comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as though it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness, then the decay of the limb spreads from limb to limb, and takes hold throughout the body; therefore hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cover it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut with the knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no further treatment except for the amount of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes at the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes at the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it goes up to the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to let the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend some ministers one of the bonds down, and others ministers the other bond up, and you sever the flesh which is between the two bonds at a spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or saw, and put on each side a piece of linen cloth, so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the member wounded with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you that it happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel of his foot, until it possessed the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed; and long after the corrosion returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that are effective after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosion; and he asked that I should amputate his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of healing the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the virtues of the man were weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have recounted this for the sake of those who want to do something else, if they need it. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a large assembly of flesh; and then it bursts and pierces, and the flesh jumps out, and remains its vessels, as if with a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as linen cloth, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "Sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone by its opening, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is that you cut all that skin around, and even when it is subtle, as with linen cloth; and it does not heal because of its corruption.  
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, thus treat it with a clyster: look if the breast is large, and the part within it is of foul odor, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take asafoetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and clysterize into the breast, and restrain the passage; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then withdraw it by squeezing; do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the stench removed; and sometimes clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and that is to take ashes from grapevine wood, and pour water over them, then drain it, and clysterize, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or in which there is a pinch of pounded litharge; or you may clysterize with honey and sweet wine, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine dries up the flesh; and when you have done this, and you are convinced that the breast is well cleansed, then clysterize with something which causes flesh to grow within it, and that is to take diaphana plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you may clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of whose properties I have spoken or in treating the ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it with an iron a little, and put inside a plug of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only the place where the clyster can enter, and if the opening that smells foul is above, then cut lower than its level. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in place, let no flesh be put upon it; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare it in such a manner that the bow runs to the lowest point that there is, for when the bow is in place, let no flesh be put upon it; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare it in such a manner: that the bow runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bow; and take medicinal herbs to put on the wound, and stay on top of the linen cloth that covers the whole wound; then cut as forces toward the hole in the breast a little more wide than the first one; then place ointment underneath the other cloth according to the quantity of the hole, and place it on the wound of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; and he who is upon the wound of the breast, often removes it to remove the bow, and know what runs from the bow, whether it be poison or pus or enough, or digested, or indigested; and take heed if the patient feels pain or no pain, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is in such a manner extended and you see the nature that jumps on the wound of the breast, then know that the breasts will close, and approach health; and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, if it does not despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Car there are men who delay healing of flesh in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if a bow is indigestible jumps out of the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not heal well; and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are swollen, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diaphinit ointment, for there is much vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and the same made honeyed mixed, when diaphinit ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue I drapel, and place it on the breast, and at no time administer a long arithmologist, and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour of quince and centaury; and use either simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is in depth, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in members; so the cure of the fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the ankle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises below the nail of the hand, or the foot, or by chance in other places; and when it becomes inflamed, and one does not take care, then it comes to a bad abscess, and bursts and flows pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance all of it; and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that there is pungent pain, and the joint is broad, and the color is loose. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity that is hanging from the joint, then cauterize the wound afterwards. 
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, then you should put the root under the nail so that it does not press on the flesh, and push it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on top of the remaining flesh medicines ardent and corrosive in order to remove everything; then care for dressings until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it, for as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal; and if you see that it will corrode, cut it as we have said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is broken, beaten, and feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the angle of the spatula sharply by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it that soothes.  
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the sore is from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some place where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of us.  
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any notch of the thigh does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the thigh, perhaps moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.  
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: so you hold to be cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or will give birth at the end of our life, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh around until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable place for him, then cure it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come from two assemblies come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut that suture so that the parts may return to their natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not close again; or you put between two pieces of fine wood, until the ends are joined, as it is necessary.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the joints come together with any of its two hands, then bind that joint as it is fitting.
des vils	of the villains 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large, swollen vessels full of melancholic superfluities, that come in more members of the body; and there happen more often in legs of those who go on foot and who work and carry, than others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer to him once purging with coles, and then the herb of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is to cut and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it completely. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The waist is thus treated in this manner: first, raise the leg of the warm water very hot, until the big vein is softened, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then evacuate and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then tie it up, and command him to stay with meat and drink black broth; and repeat the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are full, and harm to the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the leg is done in this manner: lay the patient's leg down, if there is much hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, then heat it by fire, and then cut where the vein is long from the thigh to the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with the knife, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when touched; and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as a white cord; then push the nail under, until it is lifted from the skin, and then put it on the knife lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the raised point, as you have done, and put it on another knife, as you did first; then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the heel of the foot, then treat and raise it up to the second cut; then extract from one cut to the other, until it is all pulled out, then cut it; and if you cannot draw and lift it, then put a needle in the whole strong double thread, and tie and pull it, and push it under the nail, and turn your hand on both sides, until it comes out; and guard that it does not cut, for if it cuts, it cannot be drawn nor lifted, and it comes to annoyance to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put a layer of wool moistened in wine and rose oil over the wound; and treat it until it is healed.   
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enclosed altogether, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twistedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it only cuts the vein; and it is thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civic vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and by chance it is born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body from serpents and worms, trapped between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and begins the vein to issue forth, as well as a root of a plant.  
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head of a limb is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and all times that there is a point at the fire, so wrap around the cloth, and tie it; and if it is too long, so cut a part, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out; because if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, and brings abscess and rot there, and bad illness; therefore for this reason, it is necessary that it be treated little by little to the top, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated of five palms long, or of ten, and one man came to me, to whom it issued from ten palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out the root, and pierces it to the bottom, so that all comes out; and empty the matter that is inside, and administer to the place medicines to prevent rot any day, then cure it like abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at times to this vein many rains, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot, and there comes much of pus, and from which it flows rain; cure therefore as we have said before.  
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This sickness is called in our land "ox disease," because it often happens to oxen, and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the end of limb by limb, as long as it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps; and it is engendered of rot of some humors, such as come worms and snakes and dirt and roundworms in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.  
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, it cannot be done except when it goes: so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut above and treat it further, and if the worm enters deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, constrain under it the eyebrow shape, then cut above, and treat it further; and it behooves the patient to use purification of the body with medicines solutives for the humors carried out, and avoid eating meat that causes putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This sickness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if it were live silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and went into the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she returned to where it began in her body, as I saw. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was much amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had wanted many to well have moved pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered, and for this appeared that windiness constrained; and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then place the lie above and below carefully, and then cut above until the swelling constrained in its place is gone; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure with those who discharge the swellings, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and soldered; and those that have II angles, and those that have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one that falls in any member falls according to II manners: or in a principal member as brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you hereafter, appear to you: then it is necessary that you desist from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the soft part which is on the brain, is when there is scotomies and sode and esverting and reddishness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps without matter from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps loses the speech and the voice; and jumps from the wound moisture white seeming to poults, and also jumps as burned flesh of char; and if this sign appears to you, so hold on from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the seventh moves as the pulse does, and comes out black blood, and cold sweat and cold faintness: know then without doubt that death will come.  
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the seventh that does not move its lower part is that without plain foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is beside the small ribs; and throws great pain and great grief and sigh; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it jumps out of the wound something of undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it jumps out a bit of straw through the intestine, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out and it flows, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the shoulder and the spine of the back and the leg and the hip and the legs, and the members seeming, are safe according to more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason you do it otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to the man with an arrow that shot or entered at the root of the ear: I held it and pulled it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it came out without any sensation at all. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he treated with an arrow that the one shot in the fat of the eye under the paper under, and the arrow was replaced, and could not reach more than the tip toward the shaft, and was the arrow great as a turquoise bow, at all light iron without ears; the player was healthy, and did not come to him any bad accidents. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And treat an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and skillfully as long as I treated it, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treat an arrow in a man, that was stuck in his chest or belly, and I thought he would die; and then when he had passed XXX days, he did not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and it was wrapped, and the treatment worked, and there was no bad accident. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has an arrow in his back or leg, and the wound is healed over; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor feels any pain in any of his natural works.  
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see I another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained so suffering great pain; and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treated an arrow to the man of princes the king, that it was lodged in among his ribs, and was a little leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely returned I was called to the cure after this one which was three days.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel it at all; and he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on myself for days, and closed the wound directly, and kept the patient there a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me.  
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine corrosive by hands for many days, until it was open, and I felt it and sensed the head of the arrow which dried up in its place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and it remained well for IIII months, and then it expanded so much that I put the pliers in it, and my hand on one side and the other, and it could not issue; therefore I did not cease to refine and devise instruments, until I took I day the pliers well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the wise men judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I therefore restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take everything; but the wise masters compare well on a very small thing, and on those that are present and failing, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of strange things which happen in this art.  
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are not found in the limbs where they are fixed except according to II manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is found by the place where it enters, it is an arrow entering into its flesh, and it has never been any other way. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, leave it as long as the bone is carried around, and make an ointment for the exit; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot move out, leave it so for some days, and move it each day; and then when it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce it all around with a fine needle, until the area around is enlarged, and then treat it.  
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it until it is healed after some days, because if the arrow comes to the syphax, it is death.  
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone, and does not come as far as the skin, and remains in the patient for some days without bad accident, then the engine of the breast.  
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be removed further, then administer torments as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body and if one cannot see it, then probe with all the tent; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the depth of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then fens as much as the wound is great; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the wound to which it clings, then remove the flesh which is ensnared on both sides at the point that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it out; and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, but rather that you draw it out more easily.  
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, lay it thus until the place around it is softened, then treat it, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes you contrary, so administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and guard yourself from the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put anything as you can move to draw out the arrow without peril, soon or late, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest aid that there be, and if you cannot, so place it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place so that if it is seen or felt apparently: cut therefore above, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: if it jumps out now.  
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it is drawn out; and if there is an arrow in it, push it out with all your strength; and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer a thrust, administer the instrument pointed so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push out, and if the arrow is lodged, push the instrument into its pointed entrance, in order to facilitate extraction.   
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh surrounding where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it is proper. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribs, and it is near, and you can cover it, then strike it; and keep from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if it is necessary; and care for it until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to an eye's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed head is like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for cutting and grasping is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins of which one heals from, for which there are XVI chiefs; that is to say: II batans who are after the ears, who are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries that are in the II temples appearing; and II veins that are in the II tear ducts of the II eyes, that are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the chief of the neck; and the II guindeges that are on the throat; and the II veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and II veins that are below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins with which one commonly heals are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the body, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fasted", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side of the body, and the common people call it "veins of the belly," and it is above the bone, and it is the one with which one heals, which opens clearly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and there are two of them; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: the one is below the bend of the pocket of the left side, and the second which is called phlebitis that is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called “saphenous,” which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bloodletting of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and with migraine; and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their places depending on the head: that is on your back, and where you feel the pulse below your buttock, so reign; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to all of the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well two points of the passage, and make blood issue as much as you see; then bind and tie, until it is healed; and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.  
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the II arteries that are in the II temples, it is good for old migraine, and sore, and customary ophthalmia, and to the body of tears sharp as the eyes; and the qualities of the vein are as I say: and it is that the patient restrains his neck, until the II veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below your right; and then signs of an inch; then lift the heart above the vein on your right index, and put the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, and the cup, as you have done in the other two veins, and make a correction of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right on the vein an hour, then put cotton on top; and then the tie forms, and let it rest until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and their extraction, as the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the front so it is worth as much as the vein of the cephalic for diseases of the face ancient, and to migraine, and to redness; and qualities is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "digger," whose form here is: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point upon the vein, and steady with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then tie around the patient's neck, and bind the vein as long as it is healed and never use a broad flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not fitting for the flames to be too large; and heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance, it breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are in two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the nose, and the cheekbone, and around the eye, and to the diseases of the face; and the qualities of their blood is that the patient restricts his neck by twisting with any linen, as before; then the vein, and whether the vein be through, a prick through the long of the flame a prick wide, because there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have need, and then tie on cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein of the nose is good for fever and ague, and for ailments of the face, such as migraine and pain that comes in the face, even when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose to your left hand, and takes a fine thin needle, and puts it into the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well at first, and the wound will now begin to correct; and do not let it go too deep, and make the correction of blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the needle: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the II guindeges helps in the treatment of the alaine, and at the beginning of meselerie, and many illnesses, and to empiety, and to corrodens, and to herpes, and estiomenes; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient restrains his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the chief of the sick, and the sick lying on the seat, then pierce the vein of the long one a little broadly, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as necessary; then repeat in the other vein, then untie the linen, and restrain both veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and let him leave until morning, that the wound be healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the vein of the leaves 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and tumors.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are that you make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those which are black, and by those which around them have small black veins: cut therefore both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and also do with the two veins that are above and below, for it is a same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is to the relief of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bleeding are that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side one black vein: then bleed both, and do not go too deep in them, for below are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut from which one is commonly bled are bled in two ways: or they are pricked with a whole flame very thin, or olive-oil fine as a trenchant cutter, and it is called «anesil»; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is much renowned, and is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are full of thick visible blood and contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive flame.  
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtly pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where it has subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps to those illnesses that are under the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the belly; and it behoves the surgeon to drain wisely, and that he should stay away from the artery which is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it hits the ground, and blood runs out, then you should stop it up as I have said; and it must not be a pricking flame but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you must strain it, and change another; or you want no vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein from the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cup at the flame is as we have said.  
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then so it is right that you pull out the arm, that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse; then mark the place with a sign, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame anesil; and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place enfleit, for it is from the artery: avoid therefore. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protrude upward like the urine of a child, and the skin is red and subtle, know that it is blood from an artery: haste then, and put your finger on its length, then remove your finger if the skin is intact; many times this happens; bind his arm, and let him so, and do not move him; and be in fear, and do not move him until he is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the limb is not aching, and it feels warm, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and ache the limb.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig bark, and make it into strips, and take one half and tie it well above the other joint; if it doesn't bleed, that is good; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and bleeding isn't harmful in more positions for the small wound and the tightness of the arm band. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle if helped that it treats blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the surgeon that he lie himself for the nerve that is below, and if he does not too much draw, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates it and the saints are scratched, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then it behoves you to feel it from the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head helps so much that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed in a prick at the olive branch or the myrtle branch because it is the safest of all veins because it does not have below it a nerve nor artery.  
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not grieve if one has to try the first time, and they start again; and by chance some men swell up in some places when they have tried the first time, but it does not harm them. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know of healing, is that bleeding is administered only to keep health and to avoid future illnesses; and let the bleeding be done in one of the III veins that are or cut: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent on fast day, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one must bleed the first day or the third, after II hours or III days. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting which is administered to the sick has no set hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and at all times; and it does not behoove to blood children until XIV years, nor woman carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not bleed old men who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some wants to bleed, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that he purge the intestines with a light clyster, if he has much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities harmful to the principal members; nor let anyone bleed who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk, as long as he is so, nor who is dropsy; and it is worse to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and loosening of belly, and multiplication of labor in woman, and childbirth, watchfulness and fasting, and all that the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body; then subtilize the humors, if the blood is thick, by meat and by drinks and by medicines, if you have the power; then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein of the wrist on the third finger, as we have said; and guard yourself that day from labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be calm and joyful, and let the bleeder stand higher than the one who is bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then pull the linen apart in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; then moisten the bleeding site of a little bit of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand on that vein below the wound, an inch or so where he wants to bleed, that the vein does not flee and fail to be pierced. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that are as thick as cords in the healthy person, and some that are flat with windiness, so that when one puts the flame on them, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these; and if it operates on the vein, it is too tight a wound, for which reason the surgeons should be advised about these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was or above carefully, if the leg is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient fears it, let him leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance there may come boils; nor enter into a bath, then restart the bleeding if he wishes; and if the vein is small, or the blood is subtle and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, then pierce in the same vein all the way straight; and the work gently, so that the limb be swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.  
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place is inflamed, do not begin the bloodletting, and put on a little bit of oil, because it dries the flesh of blood, and it is suitable in this place the oil; and thus administer the oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing works for three times and boils when one puts it on the place; so subtilly it spreads and separates when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess large, which happens many times, even when it is not drained except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put upon it a sponge moistened in water and a piece hot, and restrain it for an hour; and it behooves you to do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days neither black nor greenish, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put upon it nothing of aloes or myrrh set in calamine juice, monstastre, or seeming. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearance happen at the saint of the basilica: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the compression of the hand, so is that appearance bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore eschew that you put on nothing of those things we have said, for perchance it comes short without the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, then the cure of another cure, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it issue until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is fine; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who is fat and full, and has need of bloodletting, to make a wider wound on him, and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the contrary, and it is necessary to bleed little by little and often, and one must bleed by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from the shedding of blood and the severance of nerves, and it is better than bleeding through long or wide.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to one whose body lacks blood, it is necessary to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is burned, treat him with the blood III times or IV. And if he is of a cold complexion, temper before the blood softened bread in muzzy syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it happens at the vein, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of meat, and fragrant syrup fine, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of vein.  
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed from another place, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body which is already warmed, and brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in a stream; then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his arm while he is healthy, that death may not come into its place of the stream, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it is not necessary when you see to loosen the arm, and make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it; nor if it is curved, that you extend the arm completely, for this would be bad; but let it remain until he heals a second time; or you do point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out, and put upon I piece of cloth put back into shape, and press lightly. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it at all, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity exists to draw blood a second time, let it be healed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein from which blood is taken from the arm is in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red; then be tied moderately so that the vein appears well; and now pierce it through, neither too wide nor too long; and let the holes be large, and let the bleeding be done close to the joint of the hand, and if he cannot draw out any blood from there, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer; and the vein of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the vein in the right hand's salvation, it is good for all diseases of the liver, and here is how: constrain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein swells, if you see it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it completely through, it does nothing wrong; and do not go too deep in its course, because the nerves are under all naked flesh; and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot flow out.  
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to close it firmly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood of them in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is worth it for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the reins, and hips and legs ancients, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his remedy is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it burns, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins; heal therefore either wider vein, or at the ankle, that one is worth. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and cut it across like when cutting; and let the flames be as thin as a thread.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot issue blood from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the needle is required the first time, then it begins again the second time above a point, because the flesh is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make of the sophene of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle's spur, and its incision brings relief to the hip pain when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his vein so is that the patient enters into the bath, and strains above the ankle IV by twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then close the vein in all the manners that you can, and crossing; and vaut mues that you cut it, because the vein is dry, and it is much replenished to man's hands. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it [the dislocation], then look carefully for any vein that is open or toward the back of the leg, and towards the lower knee, and guard the nerves; and make as much correction of blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of the suction wounds 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Sucking blisters are made of horns, or reed, or glass; and the suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is for wounding is according to II manners: or it is with fire, or without fire; and cupping that is done by wounding and by extraction of blood is done in XIIII places of the body, because one is all in the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others in II ribs of the neck; and the cup below the chin; and the cup on the II shoulders; and the cup on the hips; and cups in the II arms; and cups in the II legs; and cups in the II ankles; and cupping does not treat of blood, but of small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken at all, as one does with bloodletting from a vein; and it is not proper that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for customs, let us administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each time; for there are some who, when they have need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who feel fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen their tongue, and bleed from it; and there are some who dream, and see by blood and nightmares and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and even when it was removed the month, we commanded to blow after .iij. hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the temples helps in the great pain of the head … which comes to the eyes, and it is not good that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the cephalic bloodletting, and it is not good for those who are of cold complexion to use it, or who have catarrh, because it causes them great discomfort; and for this reason it is not good that the old people use it, nor those who have or colds diseases. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the treatment of the pain, and for cutting the channel of the stomach, and for all, and for inflation; and one should not put too much pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the II ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and you must command the operator that he express his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not come a hemorrhage.  
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The evacuations below the chin are worth for mouth diseases, and for gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The incisions of the veins are as valuable as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and command the patient that he does not feel too much in them, because the skin is bare, and there are nerves and arteries below. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup which is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it behoves that the suction cup be large, and be of metal, that it has need to well draw; and perchance, if it were subtle, it would break; and there I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs are well-suited for drawing blood from the whole body, and they help with old pains in the reins, the hips, and the bladder, and they loosen up the flowers; and they are in place of the two shins, and the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed moderately, and place it carefully, and move evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the blood's color; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tough flesh, and clear pores: therefore it behooves to strike only once, and it behoves to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it behoves to strike twice: the first time to soften the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it behoves to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw blood little by little, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, so often we restart; and if the vein is thick, so fire it in a moment, and the end that the veins are pricked soundly, and it is suitable for him who has thick and hard skin, and who have rough pores, that you anoint the places of the cups with oil appetizing and dissolving: if it is summer, with violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or cucurbit seed oil; and if it is winter, with cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or a similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom one heals has tender skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on it, but one should wash it after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, let him rise from ease with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities raise themselves from old wine, or from water of rue, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or others like it; and it does not suit to bleed with a leech before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the leeching, and it is proper that he should rise, when he must be leeched and when he is leeched. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard he who is sick is choleric, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; it behoves him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the meal, and similar things; and minced pigeons, and meat of roast, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mince quince and pears and small onions and pigeons; and on the day that he will be bled, he must drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men at one time triacle or musk before bleeding or after, in order to strengthen the principal members; and be subtle with it, but it does not become those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are put without harming are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the bladder and the hips and the hip, because these members do not suffer being injured on their own, and one does it only in order to draw blood from member to member, like we put on the nipples when the milk flows; in order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, like we put suction cups on the belly and on the bladder to reduce the member; and remove the pain, when there is an inflammation or a stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or displaces the stone from its place; and thus does it when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained flatulence, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only so much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and some times full of warm water, like in diseases of the pleurae, and in this manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water where herbs cooked fit for them have been put. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it shall have two of a large and half palm from side to side, and have or on the side near the middle a small hole, as if to put in a needle, and be of iron, so that it does not burn the patient when placed upon the limb; and have in the middle a bar of iron or steel, to place a candle held, and be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the cups of children are other than those of old people, and those of the thin ones than those of the fat. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus place this suction cup upon the limb: grasp the candle of wax or the lining, and place it within the suction cup across from the rod that is within the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient; and then place it upon the limb, and the opening should be upon the wound that we have said, so that when one wants, it goes in the vapor, and one removes the suction cup; and grasp the lining as before, and restart often, if you have need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in illness of pleurisy, to all acute, it has no stick nor puncture, and is not administered further than when it is full of liquid, and is placed on the limb only so much; and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leech are not brought unless in members where one cannot put leeches because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar; and in the naked skin, such as two or three, and other similar things; and the qualities of the user is that when you find leeches that are in clear sweet water do not let them be sucked, so take them; and put them in a nut in sweet water, until they are friendly, and have nothing in their bellies; and then heal them by vein and leech cup, then rub the member until it is red, and put the leeches on top; and when they will be full, and fall off, if it is their place where one can put a leech cup, put it on because this is very good afterward.  
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, lift up the place of it, and then with water, very well, and then sprint it; and if its pains are too much after the skin of the wounds, then moisten a cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the wound is closed; and if the wounds are multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until they are closed; or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them remain until they dry on the place, so it will now stop; and if you need more of this, then take other wounds. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not want to take, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you insert a needle there until the pus comes out, and then put them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will flare; and when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle on a bit of aloes and silk ground, or ashes, so they will close now.  
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear child, that the fools of this chapter do not see that which is written in ancient books, nor have they ever read a letter; and for this reason, the science has been banished from our land, because I have never found any good one; and I know nothing, except through the wisdom of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have written down in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.  
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if no thing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or childhood, or old age; or if his skin is not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say, cold meats, and flesh of mutton and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; then the patient returns to his first government that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one feed the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and peas, and testes, and tripe, and stomach of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment it recovers strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken back or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of little children; but nevertheless, care, reset on the broken bone the large tendons that bind and join the limb together, as much as it enforced before; and not at all point of its work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go straight through and others that are jagged, like the point of a quill pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with a fracture, and a fracture to a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner has its engine, and its instrument proper in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes in its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by those that the lews are twisted, and open well by outside, and feels at the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torsion nor felt at touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no point of fracture; but it can have well torsion, or split, or small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not advisable that you move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in arc, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them back equally, so that abscesses come not; and if abscesses come, let him leave none day, until the abscesses are appeased; then he puts it equal to the measure that you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of this one where there are pieces; then the restraint, as it is necessary after. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, from the two parts, whether it is the hands or feet, or to the hand if it is a small limb, or to the two cords, or to one cord and to the hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset with all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work there comes no lesion nor pain to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.  
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then straighten it beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who do it through their work abscess hot and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither by turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb be so assured that it feels no pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except at the point, it is necessary to put him in such a position that he does not feel any pain; and guard that it be put straight, so that tortuosity does not come when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like: so it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: so it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole great limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no twitch; then tie entor light splints, III tours or IIII according to the limb, and restrain the hand one point at all the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain less, than the fracture then distance a point the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy side, then take the other bandage, and turn it back straight over the broken side; then raise to the lower part of the fracture, and restrain moderately, neither too much nor too little, as we have said in the first paragraph above; then put between the bandages splints of linen or cloths, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made plates on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on top of it a soothing thing for the abscess, which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days; then restrain above the stelae, and be half an inch wide sage, or from rods from which they make the claves, or from strips of palm, and be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it is needed for the limb of smallness or greatness; then restrain upon the splints as you have done at the first hour, then tie above a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; more tight it is above, less; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I want from works of the fools who make their ties with cords of linen twisted, and this is a great error, for the tie cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not become that there be between each splint less than two fingers' width. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is distressed by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their healthy ones, then put beneath them compresses of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the crushing, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here afterward.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is great, it should not be put in splints for fear that after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of abscess coming forth; and see here the manner of the ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour which is held on the sides of the mill, and it confides with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and in use, and it is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in more dispositions, and even to women and to small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three ounces of  barberry, lead oxide, and asafetida and gum arabic, ana 10 grains each; myrrh and aloes, ana 5 grains each; alechil (probably a typo for "aethiopica" or another resin), 8 grains; and make it into powder, and mix it with an abundance of egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana X З.; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII З.; acacia VI З.; Armenian bolis X З., and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of poultice for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that comes about, and the usage of bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, cooked, and put on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This poultice does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removing pain properly. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaistering for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remainder of the abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of quince, one part each; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, boil it with moist coriander water, or plain water, and use. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of setting, stronger than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of wormwood, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.  
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ipocras says in his book that on the broken limb to restore it one should put a certain made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it is between two not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and warm a little, like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and heads of sheep decocted, or feathers of owl, and wormwood, and seal equally, and grind them up, and make a plaster of it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then release it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has he moved the bones from their place; if he does not release it by hand for several days And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, then hurry, and release it, and remove the bandage now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of moist sea, and dip in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie over a nut, as long as you are sure of a hot abscess; and calm the inflammation of the limb, and the pain be removed, then begin again the fine binding, and a little bandage, and do not restrain it as strongly as before; and refine until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need ointment and linen, then recommence it, as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb any of those things that we have said, do not unbind it before III days or IV or V or VII; and no time leave it XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and approaches the adjustment of the bone on top; therefore restrain it more than first, and let it thicken its flesh, as I said before; and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; so put water warm on it then, every time that you unbind it, and this be each third day, and wipe a little the wound; by this work then shortens the nourishment to the limb, and amends hastily those that do the foolish mire, that remain the limb crooked: this is bad, and thus are works fearful, and I see no other thing than to leave it and operate it correctly. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures there are, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made from a sword's percussion, and the colz os all the bone up to the syfac which is below the bone, as is done with a haiche or fust; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure." 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called “absolute”; and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow embedded, or splitting or of the collarbone from stone, or of the head on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a break that reaches up to the skin which is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound which is put back into the bone as subtle as a horsehair, and is the fissure small, and for that reason this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound which is made either by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of the bone down, and is the lews hairy like those who make the blacksmiths when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the stone within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or chief moist bones, such as the head of a child; and it happens in all these manners of fracture that pieces are separated into small parts like stars; and I will speak of it in its place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry at the ends, and by the corrupt flesh which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of capillary is known by those who when they have uncovered the bone and rub above it, see the fracture black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, extension, numbness, and ague fever, and eyes becoming inflamed and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unavoidable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractured bone comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes to the cloth that covers the brain, then you should cut the split part like this: and it is that you prick the head of the patient deeply, and uncover over the bone in every way that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess put a poultice, if he needs help with this, and it is that you fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess has calmed, and be assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to remove the bone piece by piece, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut a narrow slice in front, and this is the shape:  
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you put another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron needle, and in work lightly, so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and stubborn, it is necessary that you pierce it around it, so that you administer splints with drills, not too deeply that they penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you may have drills for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn at your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a little after, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like tongs, pincers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, it is fitting that you reset the apparatus which is dislodged from the bone to all other instruments resembling a chisel, but it is fitting that it be more tempered and subtler than the other chisel; and if there remain anything of the small bones, or no scales, so the oste lightly to the instruments; then cure the wound of tents and dressings that we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is this one which Galien states, which is drier; and it praises a lot, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, for this is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not trench from one part, and is the piece acute in two coasts, so that the trenching is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath; if it is close to the bone, lightly remove it because it must be removed easily without pain, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the broken bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to put that asperity back together, and remove the scales with a subtle razor, which you must have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with larger razors, and after with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer cause according to its placement; and this is something that is not replied to by someone who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not aggravate the ulcer, then administer by above the other bandage, and do not tighten it too much except so much as to hold the wound only; and leave it like this for a day or two, until the abscess has subsided, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vetiver, and incense powder, and arnica, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer further medicines without stinging; and guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment there, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers upon the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and hurts, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts on the ulcer a stinging thing, it stings through. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take guard, if no evil accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blackness does not come out except for by the medicine that has been placed on it, that it have virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and III parts of rose oil and glue one drapel, and put it on the scab; then cure it in ways of cures that it behoves, until it be healthy. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that at no time are the two parts of the one above broken, or the one by itself, because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or through the two, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and to the pouch outward, until the bone returns according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the neck and cannot come to its place, then it behooves you to put it even at the head of a rail a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of two parts, you will make another band; and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or the tenth, when the abscess of the wound has been calmed, then bind with the chief of two tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.  
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind one on the other side if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said any restorer one must moisten the tents with butter, and change each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the preparation of a poultice of an egg, and of mill powder; then let the tent remain, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts in their place feathers of goose instead of tents, and so to i. souffle draped around, and it holds the blister, and blows the patient among; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the new while as you work on it, put  cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. poc of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, put on an ointment of flour of sesame and incense powder, mixed with yolk white, then put light poultices on top and do not tie it at all; and if the fracture of the bone is small and broken into small pieces, then remove them with suitable instruments, then sew the fissure together, and cure it with the things in between flesh, and soldering, as plasters and ointments appropriate for this; and if there is no wound inside the bone, then cure it with bandages, and put canes of splint on it, until it heals. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so slightly, and is not broken in two, except that it is splintered inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and push the fracture inside lightly, and the one made by the other hand outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of teeth happens, or a break, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place above the broken jaw properly, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of skin equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above as much as you can, and command the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and put plaster above, of the powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote; and put on top the light bandage, and if the plasters adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a boil comes, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone is taken away; so subtly from the removal with instruments suitable to that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it by flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to that, to prevent flesh from growing, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks more times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the works are like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the arm that feels the broken bone; and the other extends his neck towards the side; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the form be as it should, and there is no appearance nor bump.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and being and light the arm, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you put each fracture as it should.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder by strength because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie always on his back and put under the shoulder one or two hand-spans, and put the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split it up; and draw together the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut one of the incisors that you have; but put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the shaft.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not too deep, and be as wide as it is convenient, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have II heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the others narrow, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt about a hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of egg white, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the healthy hip if you need it; then take a very large bandage of one palm wide, then put I the double drape on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a piece of linen three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the piece of linen on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy hip, and under the broken hip; and tighten each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the piece of linen does not move above the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the ligament loosens, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the hip, to raise the shoulder upwards; so will lighten the fracture by easing the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until XX days; then re-apply the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it like this, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most XXVIII days, and in less time for some men.  
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breakage of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated in the middle, and one feels it only by touch; so arrange the apparatus according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on top a double cloth; then put on top a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is rough in any part of the shoulder, so use its roughness to bandage it with linen bandages, so that the splint sits evenly; and then bind it tightly with a very strong bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the joint every day; and every time that it softens, bind it again, and put the splint back in its place if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25, And when this number is completed, unbind it, and be sure, because it is not bone that puts itself out easily. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes beforehand, and is not under the skin, so do as follows, and on the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to appease abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and fever, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the grooves in the broken bone, and he feels it well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one puts one cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulder blades, and assembles the sides of the two bones with your hands, and subtly puts each in all manners as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light stuff, and envelop it in one sheet, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around on the back, and strain it firmly, and every hour check the bandaging, and if it loosens, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten then, and untie it, and cleanse what has come there with methods of care; then re-apply the bandage, and strain it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are smooth; and one feels it well upon examination of the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put the broken bone equal, as it behoves. 
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it.  
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and besides pains, and coughing and vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put a great deal of effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is proper to administer foods which swell the belly, in order to expel the colic outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for warm abscesses if they have not yet come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have already come, heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to suck out fluids forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass draws the superfluities to the spot for the sake of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say any of you should cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the inner flesh, then be cured of the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone which points to the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to protect the flesh; and then one must saw the bone, and extract gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on damp cloths in rose oil, and put it on the place; and cure while the place of that which it is right for the abscess, and be lying soundly on the side where it must, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a bone in the neck breaks, and it sometimes happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if you move them and they feel well when they are extracted and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts care to it.  
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is sound or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back there is a windiness and evacuation without will; and when one has it treated on its belly, it evacuates without will. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is set on its back and he wants to sit, he cannot.  
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its cure.  
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to them, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you warm it if there is an abscess, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones are dislocated, then it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then treat it with ointment to encourage healing until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", then put your bag from your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand in your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do this, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, if it did not have been a little weakening at the top; and making long, and declining to the side, and coming to the patient pain in the place, and prickling, and swelling of what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on the break; and know which is the break and the shape of it; and if the break is at the top only, then place equal the break, as long as it is in a natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that break is apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it even, put it on the plate, then put a beam of wood or of heart on it, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs until the fracture is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes to this place, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the collar and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick plain of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the stick with two cords, and bend them upward, and place the patient on one seat; then lay the broken arm above the stick, until it reaches the armpit, and make a curve in the middle of the stick, then put under a heavy thing or have the minister extend it downward; then put the hands together so that the broken bone returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one link, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more out, hold tight the linen below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one linen medium below the armpit, and the other towards the outside, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put the linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and on the outside; then put the fracture together, as it should be, and restrain it, if a pustule does not come.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a puss comes, then do not bind it again until seven days, and put on linen moistened in vinegar and rose oil, until the puss is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the helper, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape over, and bind on the helper and on the arm so that the arm is in its place as much as possible, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moved, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less away from the bone.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the bones, and the tension, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days at the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or that the nursing does not come to the limb for that it is too strained. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents come, then do not loosen it until after III days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the injured arm one cushion full of wool equally, and watch each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the ligaments; if it receives by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put, in such manner that the food is at first thin; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days after all; and therefore one must loosen it and administer baths and medicines of ointment to direct its place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and impeded, it remains to untie for one day or two months. 
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fosciles», because one is small, and that is the one that follows the armpit; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little toe; perhaps break the large foscile alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and healing; and when the large ones are broken, then healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and set straight. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great fissure, then it must be restrained more forcefully; and extend it above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon him, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand, or to the thigh, and one other minister to the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the eyes equal, according to their best form.  
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture the pieces are broken, put each one in its place, and if there is any separated that catches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as above with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, then glue a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it not be neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the bandage above subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the surgeon takes out the cerote, and he puts on the ointment of powdered flour with abundance of egg, then he puts the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more outward, and a little bit wider than the others; and know that it must have VI splints or arms in more dispositions: either the fracture is in one of the bones, or in II; and tighten more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less away from it, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the splint be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itchiness is appeased; and let the limb not be allowed to rest at all.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begins again the tightening, and if the ligaments are broken and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if taking care that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave so for some days, until the numbing corrects itself, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen them until 20 days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or when he has pain, then he puts his hands on his neck and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexions of virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and among us there are few fractures, and it comes but many times to a sprain
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behoves the patient to lie crossed, and to be straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal the measures, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and the bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one drape of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the base towards the belly of the palm, then make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be of heart soft as big as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it behoves.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the forearm, it behooves you to put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it tightly around the hand, and staunch the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two, if it is the arm, set it straight as it behooves; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and let it not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that is after; or you bind them all together in one, as much as is best, or you put above a splint, such as a poultice; and take heed to the restoration and disposition of the hot, dry abscess, and cure what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is done in two ways: one above the fracture, and one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his limb to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is driven into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one of the ligaments should be toward the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and therefore be the ligaments next to the knee, and be the extension down; then put the mirrors the bone equal with his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if an abscess does not come. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, let it cool then return to your work and your care; the ligature is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap on the fracture I with a stiff bandage doubled in II or III, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put I long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the head of the thread go up; then turn up the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then place in the space between the leg and the hip padding cloth to make equal the tightening, then begin to bind firmly III twists or IIII on the fracture; and as you go higher up from the fracture, and less tight; then take hold of the II joints of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie III splints that are above, then go back down to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there is no abscess or swelling or other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes up, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to set them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and draw pus out; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the hip is broken like this, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration thus made, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there are few breaks, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is no longer just a fissure, or opening, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels well.  
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: one sets equal what is round to its parts, as long as it can be assembled and moved; then put the plaster, and in it put a round splint, if you have need of it, and hold it as necessary, then review all the dispositions that we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; so put on each accident what is right for it, as long as it be healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and they have all kinds of fractures as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen; and it turns below. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer extension and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but however, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fasces of chestnut wood that support the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap in two lengths one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this binding point the leg will not be able to incline to the right or to the left, and thus it is well; and none administers one stick along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and it is placed on the leg to ward off movement, and properly done is this in a fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle no fracture comes, but to the bones of the foot there comes sometimes a fracture and to two parts, and there have been found only a few in more places.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there comes a fracture to the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, then put your foot upon theirs, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return into their places; then put the splint and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 fingers width, then restrain the foot firmly, then when you have enveloped them with cloths and other things as you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandages, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one poke wider, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it stand upon the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, as soon as we have said; and secure each accident as it is fitting.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, so make her sit enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and be held by behind; then fill the woman's cavity with cotton, and put in as much as a stoma; then take the woman out, and lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the stoma; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for VII days or more: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie it to the opening one chain, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the chain form, until the bladder is inflated inside: then nature will return the fracture; then be filled with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; and are not hidden these fractures near him who puts his study and his use, and reads my book.  
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies to us in many arrangements the right way of restoration; therefore understand. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the member, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the member; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it three days or until healed, and it will be sound quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then keep the vitriol restraint, if you have no other thing, then begin again to restore the fracture in the same hour or that day, if a pimple does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a pimple comes to it, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the pimple is appeased, and do not touch it in the third or fourth day, for you would make a bad accident happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it is necessary that you put it gently in place with your hands, to a small extent.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available for you to put it in place with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which has .vii. or .viij. points long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the artisan that he impregnates .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and one pock thick, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which the shoulder should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it once, until it comes back, and be equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have a purchase. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, so cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is so that it be in its place, then soak the cloth in dark red wine and properly set it; and do not put anything on the wound, such as a crust or anything else where there is oil, so that it will not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give good heed that the wound does not become strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish people done this, and brought upon the patient either death or corrosion at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more gentle than other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may happen, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not fitting to put on dressings; but wrap around, instead of dressings, hard bandages, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the wound swells, remove what you have placed on it with all wine, and put ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment of terra-firma and similar. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a manner that the bow pulls gently downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if on the next day it does not join but returns backwards, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason you must cleanse the wound with a sponge and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it purrs; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then heal the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.  
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bristles that come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance, the member cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if it is fresh: if it has administered medicines styptic, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocol, acacia, and similar others, as you take any of these things, or all together, and make them confit with styptic wine or with yolk of egg or with aysil; and put them on the wound in poultices, and bind them well, and do not untie it for many days; and then untie it, and begin another, until the swelling is removed; or you bind upon a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you return it to any razor, until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after the cure
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and afterwards the limb remains weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one because it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to the nourishment of the limb; or for multitude of bruising; or for too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make the body supple, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and ease; then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice draws to the great nourishment, and the bruising often of cold water, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	to the limb twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the i. plaster softening, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the muslin of vismalve, and you confit it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs grease, and grind them with hay of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands.  
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement to the limb each hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the torticollis is ingrained and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cover until the bone, with the sharp incisor lightly; and put care and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation comes from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it is now necessary to bring it back without bracing.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Because if one delays, then the limb swells, and by chance if one sets it back in place with pain; therefore it is not fitting to move it when it is swollen: many times it brings forth a spasm and other pains; however, when this occurs, have the patient bled, then leave him until the abscesses are all appeased; then rise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and care for each member as if it had come to its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to .ij. manners: or they are a bit displaced from their places, and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more disarrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then it behooves you to reset it carefully, and not shirk; and in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and put the thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it equal; and command the sick person to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fist puts it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is being reset with pain, even if it is the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently reset; do not hesitate to reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with softened stuff, so he puts on cloths moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then tie him lightly with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his jaws be between two cushions, so that he does not move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he strive to bite, but takes light food, as long as the pains are removed, and the mandibles are healed; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not work hard to open his mouth when eating and drinking, until the mandible is well healed and healthy. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed boils come, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of clear mucus.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many times die those who have it, within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The sprain cannot dislocate from the inside of the rib and from the hip, and it is dislocated no times to the outside, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put a splint and bandage on top, and restrain it; and the head which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if so, and if it dislocates again at any time, reset it in its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and order the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way is restored the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it is dislocated to the side of the hip and outward; and the second is to the side of the breast; and by chance dislocated to the upper part, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and more often dislocated downwards toward the hip, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it is easily moved; in those who have enough flesh, it is moved with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.  
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore it behoves you to prove it, until you are certain; and then begin the cure.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it is down towards the seat, and puts difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the seat to touch the head of the shoulder, as if they were one bones; and the sick person cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly to touch; and this manner of dislocation is not hard to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their hands under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it down; so it will come gently.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days afterward, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and give him an ointment softening and soothing, such as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilotus in water, and let him take it; then lay the patient on his back, and put under his buttocks a cloth of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the wounded person's foot on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that he does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see it so reset according to this manner: and it is that you make present the man who is taller than the patient; and let him be on his right side towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the buttocks of the patient, and lift the buttocks upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can carry nothing heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And to reset it in another manner: and one takes a long stick in the earth, whose head is as that of a pistol, and is neither too big nor too thin; then put it under the patient, but that he has blankets above, and the patient lies on the long part of the stick; then extend his hand down on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, so do this cure: take a stick from the arm of great and four spans wide, which has the head round to enter in through the shaft under the shoulder, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie on top of the staff a sheet so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder of the wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a sphere of wool even, then put the plaster prepared from powdered millet, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder carefully, and turn the linen upon the plaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he bathe softly, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal more quickly; and then bathe again after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it behoves you to administer cautery to three perforations, as it is placed in front of or chapter of cautery. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joint is never fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or rear, it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness of movement, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to points, and returns to points; and it is dislocated from all sides, even before and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because one sees it well and feels it well; and is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased blade with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is sprained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus as an abscess comes from there, because if an abscess came from there, it would be painful to put it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is behind; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands hold against the cutting edge of the knife, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fire of the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then when you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; and when the minister has joined the joint to his hand, he puts oil of any kind to soften the joint, then pushes the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster over it with yolk of egg, and strain it firmly, and put the arm on the collar of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it so for some days, until it is firmly set; then unbind it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe him well and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a wool sheepskin grease, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the sheepskin back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do II times or III, until it is healed; and if you see, put on top wool of wet hay heated with butter, and strain it over; it will return to its position. 
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be brought back to its place immediately as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell or come to have a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the replacement is that you put the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it equal, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns entirely; then it is necessary to see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of their hand on a table at extension and replacement. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts the back of their hand on the table, and the one caring for them puts their hand on the appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted; and does not harm the patient except that as long as the hand is softened, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy but to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is nothing else. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have said, then bind it and leave it for .v. days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the thumbs of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the knuckles of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly; therefore, they take the joint and put the dislocation to their pouches until it returns, then support the head of the joint, and pull it toward the direction where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal on the day; and don't tie it, as we have said, and untie it by day, and make it move, and tie it back again; and do this often, until it is tight, and also do so if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do so when it is dislocated on another side. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the articulations jump out without will, and cannot hold them, and many times they are softened any member, or the two thighs or the two arms or one. And many times it moves the shin to four parts; that which moves at the rear is called “gilbositez”: the cure of this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing altogether. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancients said were cured by great words, in which there is little profit at all; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.  
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast forward, there is nothing nor health; and also that which comes straight in II sides, and one can cure only that properly which comes at the back, as I said; and it is that the patient be spread on his face in I place equal, and have a strain below him, so that he does not move; then put the stick at the head in earth forming, and the other to the feet, and tie a linen under the armpits of the sick man, and the other to the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers tighten the linens, one at the head and the other to the feet, among the II sticks; and be well closed, the stick as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of III arms long, and place it under the armpit, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the armpit, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the limbs of the patient on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the tourniquet which turns by hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is that you put II tisons at the head of the sick man of an arm great, and towards the feet II others, and have between each tison, up and down, a palm of space of long; and have in each tison I pertus, where the turner corrects, and be the tison firmly in earth, so that they do not move; and between each II tisons have I tison turning, for which the lien turns, and have in II turning II small tisons of a palm of long, to turn the turner; and then tie the lien which is among the assels to the turner towards the head, and the other lien towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner to all the lien, and the master puts the spine even as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is evened out, place a drying plaster with an abundance of egg upon it, and then the bandages, and then the stele of a tablet of three fingers in length, that which covers the site of the gibbosity and the portion of the healthy spine, then tie it with a linen band, as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until it is healed; and if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have mentioned above; and sometimes one administers a piece of cork, and sometimes it appears in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocations; and this is the bone which opens up, for which reason one should not have presumption: by chance would come death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only by dislocation, not as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within it is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee; and there is the swelling which is below inflamed with an abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.  
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one to whom it comes to the fire, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well according to its fulfillment; however, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to move forward, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint is at the place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for treatment; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocations, so hasten that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has need of other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must appear to the minister strong, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands below his shoulders, then the grasp of a linen band upon the hip; and another holds the head of the leg; and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at one time, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not so, it is necessary to take care of its appearance. When the dislocation is at the hip, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the groin, and the place which is below the angle, then stretch the linen upward toward the angle, and towards the thigh; then seize with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large place of the diseased groin, and extend it outward form: so it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen cloth above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let them be hung by the head from a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let there be other ministers hanging with the sick person, who embrace firmly the hip, because the joint now returns easily.  
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gilbosite, and straitens the linen on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also; then he puts two sticks, one at the head and one at the foot, then puts a stick between the hips of the sick person in the middle of the shape; and have a planty of moist cloths around it so that it does not blister the sick person, then stretch each minister towards him, and the myres puts equal to his hand the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not done, place him upon a table, and press him as we have said in the chapter on childbirth, and lay the patient upon his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister his pain to be on the aching joint, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the hip, it is not necessary to extend the patient down, nor raise up the ground, but it is necessary that he is as if his hip was dislocated outward, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table; and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest III days or IV, then untie it, and put the splint on; and if you see that they are even, then strap it, as before, and let it be for III days; then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if it does not come to rest at his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg as much as he can, and place your back on his flank, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee with your palms, and retract between your two, then bend the two bones forming the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests lightly on his hip; and apply the plaster on top, and make the leg rest on the hip, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, then untie it; and do not let the patient work, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not set right, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound 
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely pulled out, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs of it are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated; its returning is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when it is only softened. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him by the ministers except by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then up the leg, and put the foot back up well; and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will come back; and if it cannot come back like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie blankets around, so that the patient does not get cold; then hold the ministers the hip, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the ligament, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the stakes be well between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when one extends; then put your hands on the dislocation, and other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set, put the plaster and bandages on top, and constrain it firmly, and tie his foot to his leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligatures are not too tight; then let him lie II days or III, and if the ligatures soften, then strain it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for IIII days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes there, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to gently extend them without effort, and this is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his flat or i.e. table quite straight, and put your foot on what opens of these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is equalized, and there is nothing open, then put under the sole of the foot a table to the shoulder, then strain firmly, and leave it for III days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies: so be not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long; and if you are not pitying and merciful and tardy, nor bold; and use at the beginning of calming things abscess hot, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then restore the limb to its place, so that the abscess chauld may come there; and when the limb is in place, administer calming things abscess hot, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments; and if with dislocation a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and keep yourself from entering into fear, according to what I have said, for this will cause you to die according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.  
Amen	Amen 
