O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made an end by its expositions and by its declarations.  
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'. 
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everything, so is the science lost and diminished, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. 
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this came the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.  
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I will revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; 
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.  
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes it to mount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of origin.  
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work a little. 
et meismement en l’art de main.	and also in the art of hand.  
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, should guard himself so as not to err and to injure people.  
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	and just as I have seen many times more than these who involve themselves in this science and abandon their science and sense of experience.  
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen a fool who has made an incision of a carbuncle or neck of a woman, and has also cut into the arteries in the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for which so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between his hands.  
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I have seen another physician who was treating a stone from a man's body, and the stone was large
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.  
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called for to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.  
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another wound that took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the poor ignorant healer strained the fracture over the wound as stars by very strong ligatures, and did not leave any of xalene to the wound, and left it thus at the end; 
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded him that he should not untie it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And remained thus that the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I untied it, it was in peace and he felt no pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it. 
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And did not cease the corruption from going through the member until the member was completely lost.  
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another sight who burst open the abscess, and then inflamed it with the malice of its lord. 
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not befit that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupt. 
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions: 
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which reason it is necessary that you guard against them, so that foolish people may not speak ill of you. 
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised. 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the treatable diseases to a better health; 
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your weapons from that which causes you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his admonitions:  
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	“Take no care for ill-health, lest you be called a foolish mirror.” 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	“I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.”  
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is of fire cautery and of medicinal cautery, and it is the chapters ordered from the head down to the feet; 
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of the instruments, and of the workings of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of suction cups and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And are the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.  
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is to restore dislocations and twists, and similar things; 
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And are ordered from the head just as far as the feet, and the forms of the instruments.  
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the help and the nuisance of each complexion. 
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of the help, and the nuisance, is the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And of this speak most sages, and agree to this;  
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterizing helps universally to all complexion where it has matter, for  it complexes:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know complexions hot sense matter, and complexions dry sense matter.  
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion together matter, they said none and said that cautery is great help; 
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the contrary:  
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is of no use to illness that comes from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of a hot illness by heat, nor by dryness; 
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and says he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men.   
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold. 
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.  
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it no time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all ways, let no one intervene except he who has practiced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; 
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases.  
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery. 
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that  cautery assembled fire is of the secret of cures, and of greater good than cautery of burning medicine. 
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if he is named. 
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning medicines come from member to another in separating, and bring to the member illnesses of grievous healing;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance kills the patient. 
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.  
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things. 
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I deprive you of the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon what time the cauteries should be made and when they are to be applied. 
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harms arising are lessened by the help of cautery; 
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and also if the cautery is for necessary pains, except and until they cannot endure the time that greater evil comes to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish men do;  
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; 
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is better than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And a certain thing is that the disease comes never according to the complexion of the patient and its place and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not cauteries administered where there it has little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of bone for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.  
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens little. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is so. 
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer manners of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears well that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.  
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and for the height of its substance.  
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause rot, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men.   
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said.  
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much; 
si font au feu;	as they do in fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough impediment.  
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our cauteries of iron which we have found to be more effective in our work.   
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the heads to feet, for that the vein be easier to find.  
dou cautere olivaire	Of the olive cautery 
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds done because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitudes of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases. 
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine solutive modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtue and the age and the habit of the patient can suffer. 
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make a hole in the head of the patient.  
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs; 
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; 
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds then apply the cautery which is called 'olivarius', because of this is its form: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do by descending and pulling your hand back and forth turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then raise your hand slightly, and look at the spot if you see the bone little;  
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After that take a piece of silk, and put in soft cotton inside it, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;  
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After put on above a softened cloth; 
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave on as long as the burn is removed. 
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treat the wound with an ointment that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healed.  
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say the ancients, that when longer it stays open the wound, more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	And for this so help moves. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say none of these that one must let the cautery as long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they say the other that one must let the cautery as long and thrust so strongly one lowers the bone also wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for this that the humors come out moved.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound long uncovered; 
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after it one must cure and treat.  
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except in certain men where there is a way of fear. 
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I believe that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head is weakened by the continuous dissolution of nature, as we witness in other members; 
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more wholesome and useful for me, and from this I operate in such a way as to assemble health. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of purgation of the head and oils and plasters; 
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery that we have said before, and it is not effective 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and is not too cold. 
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize it with less heat than the one we have said above.  
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After making the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery at their place that is called "vessels"; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put them in where one puts  suction cups. 
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and align your hand so that you cannot see up to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I shall speak of it later; 
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head 
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the jaw is purged by medicinal infusions, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help. 
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then I make cauteries according to two ways, that is to say of sharp medicine and of fire.  
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the rind and cut it into two pieces as big as the jaw, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum under the skin. 
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it will be placed there, bind it and restrain it well and leave it so for twelve hours.  
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	And then untie it and treat fiercely with garlic ointment, and leave the wound so for II days or III.  
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put a cotton swab soaked in butter over it as long as possible. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After curing with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see it doing so, do any of the burning remedies that I have written or read how to treat burning remedies.  
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery according to its shape, which is: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a key or has one curve at its top, and in the middle a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and move the fire slightly for a little while, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned. 
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and gently touch your hand so the artery doesn't burn, which is fiery, and flows abundance of blood. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton in awad of silk, and put it on the place for III days; 
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put soft cotton dipped in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed. 
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare," do it all at the tip, and guard against cutting the artery in this migraine which is not ancient. 
de emigraine	of migraine 
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not help it, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white. 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And thus reign over the place with a line of half a finger in length, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come to the bone. 
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And guard the jawbone that moves when it is moved, and let the nerves only attend to the movement and that spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or cutting may cause great fear even to him who does not know, and who is not a student and experienced; 
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work be in the middle way;  
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at its place where it appears in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; 
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; 
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of ears from cold.  
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened it with medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called 'point', of which here is the form: 
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or around the two if the pain holds in both, and you move a little up from the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn. 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care the place until it is healed.  
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth. 
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture which must be cured by cautery is only from those that move phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make a cautery of appearances that come from dryness and swelling of nerves. 
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torture which is silent with phlegm of eyes and expectorations of head and gargles, and that does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: 
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; 
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cautery in the part that is healthy, and make cauterization in the part of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery as long as half of the heart is burned. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:  
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And is the likeness of the scalpel that we have set before, but it is a bit more subtle and it behoves the knife to be a bit larger;  
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing its place as I have said before, until it is sound. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When a stroke is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I make four cauteries: 
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle, which is called 'vessel', as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; 
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be cured as we have said before.  
de litargie	of lethargy 
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	To this sickness it behoves to give the patient large doses and pills that clarify the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After kings lay the head of the sick man flat, and he puts upon the back of the head the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in plasters 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cautery:  
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if the fire as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy so, good is; 
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not so, then he makes III cauteries of the head descending until the neck, and there is a space between each cautery one palm;  
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and cures it like the others, and if you see it joined, and the patient is suffering, then he makes one cautery in the middle. 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if need be, two others on the two horns, and cures it as long as it is healthy.   
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.  
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head 
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be purified with herbs and those things we have said before. 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after rinsing the head of the patient, then do cauterize in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind and III on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is intense, then do IV cautery on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the care as long as it is healed, and be the cautery which is called "olive" that we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not use cautery other than that which is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purify the brain with herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from much medicine.  
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then one makes gargles and chewing changing the brain often with good meats; 
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's head in the middle, and one makes the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; 
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is weak and suffering, one makes cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, one makes the cautery subtle according to this manner: 
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy are the superfluities or moistures corrupted and phlegm thick, then one cauterizes with such cauteries as we have said to the one who has paralysis. 
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by reason of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is before in the division.  
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After raise the head of the sick one; 
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after make the pad of linen well done, as also the circle, so put it in the middle of the head;  
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the sick one sit crossed, and be held well on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after present the linen, and it is worth smearing of wool fat ancient;  
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the heat to fire moderately, so that the two if he put it can suffer;   
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after empty the circle from within in the head, and let it cool; 
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the sick one each week once with another good government, as long as he be sound.  
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see them cauterized, making many points on all the cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; 
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then puts on moistened cotton in butter and fat of gooseberry. 
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes  
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do give the patient something purifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting. 
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After, he commands him to put his head back, and make him cautery in the middle of the head, and make him two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and make all the cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; 
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And guard against the flowing of blood, and if you see too much blood issue, so restrain it with such power as you have.  
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the cautery how you will stop it. 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And no time is a cautery or hot iron applied below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the course of tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beside the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside. 
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And one sees that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the art descending to the eyes: 
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize in the middle of the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where a hot iron is applied below the two bones. 
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is needed more, cauterize it wisely above the eyebrow with a small cautery. 
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with two wounds of tears within the eyes  
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient III nuts each 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after  the king the head, and make a cauterization or middle of olive oil cautery;  
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on the two eyebrows, one point below the hair;  
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery that you do not cover it. 
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':  
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called 'olivare'.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form 
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see so, it [cauterizes] on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let the hand go except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which pricks the eye  
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one does cautery according to these two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine. 
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient on their healthy side. 
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as well as the leaf of the myrtle, and it be the beginning of the sign beside the hairs; 
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then one puts cotton moistened in the clear of an egg and mucilage of pellitory on the eye, then heats the cautery of this which is the form:  
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the hairs be burned there at the place; 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; 
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave so three days, then one puts cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of ointment as long as it be healed.  
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this, the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, just as you did first. 
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are burnt, cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye at all. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and quicklime, each a third, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it carefully so that it does not cool, then on a board above the form you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put over the eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the patient holds only in one eye, then one should work in that one, and if in both as well; 
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put under the eye cotton moistened in the yolk of an egg;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient be in your hands and put your hand showing on top of the medicine, and press the pus and the yolk all times that the patient feels a biting from the medicine, because it feels a bite like fire.   
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your hand. 
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting will have passed, then lift the weight of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set. 
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put moistened cotton in butter until the embers are ashes, after which cure the place of the ointment which is called "dyphenis" and others, as long as it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to work well on your work with great care that it does not fall from the eyes of the medicine. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that one which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	afterward cure until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to those be your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not be returned the right way to him whose is the study of this art.  
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the cure of fistula by cautery 
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cautery to him according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy side 
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it lean its head. 
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put moist cotton in the shell of an egg or in pear juice on the eye.  
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heat the cautery which is such: 
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is curved at the head like the shape of a vulture's feather, together with that which is the cautery 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see it, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see fit, it should also be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But all the same, this which is curved is more suitable for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus and dry it
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, then perform the work, and treat externally the bone; 
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Afterward place the hot heated cautery on top, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part over the eye so that your hand does not move foolishly. 
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.  
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, begin the cautery again once, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for 3 days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Afterward put on moistened cotton in butter, and treat with the ointment of desiccation until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.  
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Attend to a fistula, and cut its place; 
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after put in the fissure the subtle camphor of which here is the form:  
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it to the quantity of one third of an ounce; 
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand over the camphor firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted resin does not run to its eye; 
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine or vinegar;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the resin so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.   
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer pus to the nostril, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nostril according to what is fitting in its proper place.  
des crevaices en levres	Of openings in the lips 
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, openings in the lips appear that are called "pimples," and even in the lips of children.  
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these openings as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then use a small scalpel cautery according to this form: 
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And place it carefully into those openings until it comes just to the bottom.  
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, cover the area with cerate until it is healed.   
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat 
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made putrefaction and rot and becomes a fistula; 
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit at all:  
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	therefore it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; 
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the bot or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes at the bottom of it, and its last point; 
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after the cure that we have said in treatments, until it is healed;  
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is healed thus, it is good; 
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this doesn't happen, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your chapter. 
dou movement des dens	due to the movement of the teeth  
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and they don't help, then put the chief of the patient in your hand;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery whose form will come after here, in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; 
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and set inside the hot cautery carefully, and hold so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; 
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse fiercely.  
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried. 
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery according to II manners: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.  
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a churn, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel;  
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after take cotton and wrap on the point of a tent, and dip it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see such wool and cotton dipped in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and place hot iron above it until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth; 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery also called fire is such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; 
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, of which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled. 
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.  
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter before applying the cautery, and then pull (it) forth. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you are able. 
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cauterizer:  
des scrophules	of scrofulous sores 
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofulous sores are of phlegm and cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described after which comes the form, and have it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side.   
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; 
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for 3 days; 
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on moistened cotton in butter until the burn is gone;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after care the wound with ointment and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors overcome on the channels of the body, and even when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines; 
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after that you make cautery to the root of the throat, and guard yourself that you do not come as far as the throat, and do not burn more than a little bit of  the heart;
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the fire cautery is made to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be as we have it described before. 
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	of the fist 
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and sickness of the fist is due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the sickness is ancient, then make II cauteries on the knuckle in their viscera. 
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and the other cautery removes the pain between the two nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be according to the form that has been described before. 
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, make cauteries pricking at all the cautery which is called "poins" for as its form is here before in the illness of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points reach up to XXX, or where they fit. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at three fingers' widths according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for these are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.  
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation 
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. 
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After be sure the patient lies on his back and on his ribs; 
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after lift the head which is inside the tiltle with two hands of your left. 
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated inside, then cauterize it with the fire as it has two nerves in this place; 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the liver until it pierces to the rib, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries;  
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries;  
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves;
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined upon this one nerve so that there are eight cauteries. 
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put the cautery on, rolled with silk;  
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make the patient rest, and let not move the limbs by long time until he is well fortified.  
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which seldom happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking.  
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient heals. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it afflicts his complexion, and multiply catarrh to him, and in ways of accustomed cures and he profits not, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and his hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From this then afterward make three cauteries one below the shoulder blade by the quantity of a die, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries outside the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and have such spacing between each other that they are not joined together when they will rot; 
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be so perfect that it touches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see cauterizing with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach in a spot according to the quantity that you see fit; 
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "point".  
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, until it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his high-back; 
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign of the third cautery according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the ribs of man come;  
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and have space between each cautery the thickness of a die; 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long from the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery; 
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only the half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms; 
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is so, you cauterize these cauteries of the cuticle, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make the whole body dry; 
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let him not come near boiling water, for the ears are very delicate there, and one can see it. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;  
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this cure fails to achieve its purpose, it is necessary that the patient be cared for on his head;  
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then make a poultice in the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the sunbeam, because of this it is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the ear be burned and come to syphac, as long as the puncture is all clean.   
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed. 
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it does not behoove anyone other than those who have studied medicine for a long time and whose hands have cured these illnesses to use this cautery. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he may boldly operate, and in all ways it seems to me better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleuresis 
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must make cauteries for pleuresis with roots of aristolochia, and in such manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you can find, and whether it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your finger;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and soften it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize with this cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and II make small cauteries one by one descending in the part which is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And he cauterizes between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little. 
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And he cauterizes in the middle of the hip, and one on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two in the space of the two ribs under the fire cautery which is between the two shoulders.  
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand, but make it open as if smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no one ancient used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs until it comes to this abscess; 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and leap out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured. 
de la mice	of the mouse 
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse of what we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not benefit, then they apply three kinds of cautery that are all good. 
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not hasten your hand with all the cautery, and let the patient be propped up on his back; 
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and raise the heart which is placed in the mouse, or the cuts from the patient's side come toward the left, and be the elevation that you raise the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After it burns the two nerves inflamed as long as the heart is pierced from the other side, and then drive out the cautery, and so there will be four. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, burn all the cautery to three nerves.  
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before mentioned. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy  
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the breast; 
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cauteries be well close to the root of the heart.  
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterward leave the cautery open to prevent putrefaction for a long time, and do not let the treatment of the sick person after the cautery.  
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is set before.  
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet 
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is hydrophic, and are full of yellow-green fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger. 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, so that the yellow-green fluid is forced out, and let the cautery be according to this form:  
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After do on each leg two cauteries at the point of the calf. 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg. 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, that the fluid may issue.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment of other treatments that we have said. 
de la menoison	Of the house 
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a belly solution comes from cold and moisture, as much as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are debilitated, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; 
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, in the circulating cautery; 
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four cauteries around the buckle subtle to all the cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauteries on the kidneys. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the hip, and the cautery on each groin, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids 
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the base, or one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: 
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, which is all outside below the armpit point and point in triangulating, and I cautery below the bud II must; 
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that its stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then to the face one does I great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; 
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the cautery open long time.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the place until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh that is called "thelul"  
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut thelul, have the cautery heated which seems like a razor, and then put it all blazing on top of that thelul cut. 
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave it as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood doesn't stop. 
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each one as we have said. 
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the cures of ointments benefiting until they are healed.  
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the body, there will be more help. 
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly cured wound  
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such illness that can only be cured by cautery. 
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any one comes fistula, and is enveloped and laid corruption and moistures corrupted, so the does prove to all a tent subtle, and guard that thou knowest to all the tent how much it has of parfont. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heats the cautery which seems I razor, and puts it in the fistula according to the quantity that li tent there entered, and recommences lou cautery until cil corpse porris and corrupted be burned, once, or II or III, according to the quantity of som behoove; 
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard thyself from harming the nerve which are inquin, and the great veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard thyself of these places, and do not make those fuers than in place carnous, and think that she is not mien persons;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After cure the place as long as it is healed, and if the places are clean, and the materials are removed long time, then you know that the places are entirely healed. 
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not removed, know that the places are rotten, and the bones at the root are corrupted.  
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus as one of these that we shall say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the illness of the kidneys 
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great flatulence, and does not take any talant from woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; 
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be III cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid. 
de la vessie	of the bladder 
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, both right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the distance between one thumb and another; 
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make that cautery on fire on the back, where it is needed.  
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously stated. 
de la marris	of the margin
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on fire on the back; 
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cautery be of the clavicle, as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip  
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the bone of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;  
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the place of the department is visible, so you should cauterize the patient above the bone of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle; 
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cautery be like that with which one cauterized the stomach.  
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, make III cauteries of the olive large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain  
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment is not working, and the illness is old: 
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other pills that seem to be good. 
Aprés li fai cautere;	After this do cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: 
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.  
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: 
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the socket of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and wide, and have between each cautery a space the size of two, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; 
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	At no time is cautery made in the middle upon the head of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have before said in the dislocation of the hip; 
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the flesh be burned.  
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh nor as far as the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, then one makes II cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII fingers, to the left part a bit.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery be a cupped blade, and let it burn the thickness of the heart. 
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two inches of the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points with the cautery which is called “points.”  
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, if he does more. 
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterize with the cupped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do no more harm and contraction to the patient.  
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who made cauteries on the ankle of the foot, and left it there so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the whole foot.  
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach solution from which he died.  
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.  
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, because this is how it is done, make it like this iron and be at the top as big as a thimble or a little less, and be by interlaces and be from one interlace to the other with space the quantity of a finger's knuckle;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the interlaces be towards two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be in the hip iron well made; 
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and give off a smell, and then put it on the side of the sick hip, and let it be turned over onto the healthy side; 
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cauterize once the cautery is on and let it for three days. 
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered long time. 
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as long as it is healed.  
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery out of fear of its danger, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless those are good cauteries, which he can suffer, and where it is needed. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine burning is that you make the instrument in entrechatres in which descends the margin of the door, and be it of iron or of steel to a long point, and in its height have two, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a die;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be opened from above and below, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After place the hip bone of the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand well upon the hip bone; 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	after put between the two circles of the hot iron which is heated to fire one point, and leave him an hour to ten, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there is found medication also as of fire; 
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the medication has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip bone of soft wax, and leave so three days, and put upon butter as long as that which is black from the scald is removed; 
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him for three days until corruption be drawn out;  
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the care of ailments until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, then you do the instrument that holds according to what you have done in the hip augmentation. 
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated it of the rectification of medicine.  
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.  
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where it has the small opening where the point of a razor can enter. 
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put this pot into another pot well leaden, and put above alkali and quicklime and sweet awe until there is twice as much above the powders than you would have well gripped in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let him so until it descends like a fever and stool or as much as possible, then take all this matter, and put it on heat and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be much fever and is administered in various types of medicines and cauteries of other members.  
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does work like fire, and with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip as well as turpentine and honey of cashew and heat with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it very much, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this manner that you take the green earth litharge, fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the boil. 
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And let it sit for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.  
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath as long as his body is a little aroused, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.  
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fire of sheep, it helps a lot; 
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and must be done the cautery in this manner.  
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called foscile. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take fibers of dry sheep, and wrap them in fire until they are embers, and put it on the linen, and leave it until it is extinguished; 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do again in this way, and do not cease to do thus until you think by sense that it comes as close as the hip, and that the pain is ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of sheep". 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back 
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by sitting or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar cold matter that is spread out, none of these resemblances are worth cautery, except for those that come from the infusion of cold matter. 
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after those things that the patient is void of stinking pills or other similar ones, that one makes upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with an incisions, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; 
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and be made the cauteries according to the cautery which is called "point"; 
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make III or IV cauteries at the middle clavical cautery according to this form;  
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times comes this disease to little children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow throat when they lie down, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines. 
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to cure it, if you cauterize it with the cautery of this one according to this form. 
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery scorches each part of the spine equally.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery II lines or III, and let the points be near each other. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery in proximity which is in the space of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints 
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is from humors which are spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in feet, that which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then do cauterization to the whole cautery as one claims "point". 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and these happen many times, then do cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, to all the olive shaped cautery; 
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have need of more, then do more, but do not hold your hand further than while the head of the cautery is burning.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, so make points around the bone two lines. 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain at the two joints, then do nothing on each joint and on the hair of the hand; 
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to the armpits or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government to the patient and prescribe medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him good governance and purge phlegm, then he will be healed by the help of God.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the sciatic nerve 
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes in the buttock and the testicles descend to the groin and it is new, then when you see him cured, he must not move that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which make the belly low, so that the intestines descend from his belly; 
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his leg as long as the testicle is repaired, and move them to your groin, and rule of inch below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery of which this is the form: 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it gives off a smell  
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bones to their place; 
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistants hold his hand above so they do not return backward;  
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs on the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other upon the hip which holds his hands; 
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the mark with all your might, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again once more until you come to the bone; 
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and beware subtly that the bone does not jump when you make the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it; 
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this the patient does not die, or other ills.   
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of the bone, and of big people as large according to their measure;  
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after III days of cure the place of the fire cautery as much as the burn is removed 
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the cure of other ailments as long as he is healed, and lie the patient XL days on his back as long as the wound is well sutured; 
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his dressings be lengthened, so that the boil do not protrude when he tries to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after XL days, when he wants to rise, if he is given a well-made splint, and wear it for another XL days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too great repletion of drink and eating, and of too much heat; 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he does this teaching, he is healed entirely. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall say hereafter the cure of tailoring in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly 
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, make the fire cautery on them according to their quantity, and either burn one-third of the tumor; 
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with the three-angled cautery according to this form:  
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of incision and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another one below, and hold your hand in the middle of the cautery clamp. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and finer. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in any limb 
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or from striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is healed from the first cautery, it is well;  
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	But if not healed from that first cautery, begin another cautery on top of it, because such a custom is that it must heal to the limb that it is nearest to, for which reason it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healing.  
de meselerie	Of the mixing 
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ailments are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and also the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see it being cauterized, take care that the patient is at the beginning and if she is cured according to what we have said in the division and does not send nor remain, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the whole sick person, then make V cautery on her head: 
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I put one on the back of the head and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. 
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And II on the two horns, and I behind on the nape.  
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And let your hand so that the cautery comes until the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the big humors can escape. 
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize the mouse according to what it is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mess is spread everywhere
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it loses manifestly, so it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries which we have said or chief, and I cautery on its nape, and II cauteries on the spine of the neck, and VI cauteries on the spine of the back, and I great on the hip and the other below, and II on the two shoulders;  
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II on the elbows, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; 
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard the nerves that are on the rear heel, that you do not burn them;  
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never has one made a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and the other on the bone of the stomach, and the other on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And knows that when more is done cauterization, the more it does help, and moves him profit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already completely corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, cure the wound with a mixture of flour of violets with honey and other treatments until it is healed.  
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When a swelling comes in any member and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with ointments until it is healed.  
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And at times one makes a cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nonetheless, let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of  albars 
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the sickness called "albaras" is  enshrined, and the tools of medicine are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery in a spot through, according to the quantity of the thickness of the heart, until the redness is removed, and its color has changed.   
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then cure it with flour of veils and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from alondrine, of each one part; 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be mixed all together, and be tied with a cloth, and be aired in its place until it is healed.  
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure of the sore by cautery 
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, if you cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nonetheless the sages say that one should make cautery also in the middle of the ulcer;  
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And nonetheless those seem to me not good, because I fear that it may become more ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wished for it to happen any time; 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And more appropriate a thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called 'circle,' as we have said in many types of cautery. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die 
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a malady that is called "adubelati," and it delays in dying, either because of the superfluity which it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see him hasten to die: 
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore, cauterize it around with a small number of cautery points;  
aprés le laisse ensi.	after this, leave it so. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.   
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it burning with the whole cautery, then heat the cautery as this form is: 
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this malady which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the kernel, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning from outside in such a manner that the course of the rot is alleviated. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After this, cure it until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron  
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of malady there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing else than a rot of a limb, for it gnaws at the members as dry vines do lines.  
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place where it can endure fire cautery, then sharpen the cauteries, small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the illness is. 
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cauterizing all parts as much as you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed.  
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places crushed ointment with oil as long as the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.  
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointment generating flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh is not born, it is good;  
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if this is not the case, then begin the cautery again on those that remain corrupted from the places. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this malady has at times been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; 
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure with hot medicine in the division;
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of sprouts that come to the feet 
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet due to fire a sickness is born which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a very bad thing that inflames the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	The cautery of fire is that you heat the iron cautery as much as is a goose quill feather, and make it of good iron to the measure that it may pass over the nail from all sides, and that it have subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After he puts everything hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail.  
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and he leaves it thus for three days until it begins to rot. 
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then he makes a poultice of wild mallows crushed with wool, and leaves the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he cures the place with ointment until it is healed.  
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this manner: 
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a piece of iron or steel, or a feather of a vulture, and put it on the nail and the other thing, that is to say warts. 
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the iron clamp so that it surrounds all around, then place a piece of hot wax on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the clamp comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep to the root; 
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure a bit the burning of the hot water for an hour;  
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave him like this, and it will detach itself from all its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have removed all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling  
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then it behooves you to make them IV cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; 
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and for the cautery or weight, and on the stomach with the olive cautery; 
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if you let it tremble, and hasten the health of the cold sickness.  
des pustules puans	of painful pustules 
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear through fires the body bathed, or painful pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.  
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	so it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: 
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by the fire, or of long aristige root, or with the lens cautery.  
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes the cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from within forward, but are disrupted the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.   
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut  
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things. 
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to stretch.  
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very hard until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop issues any more. 
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put on fire the olive cautery smaller and larger ones until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then grasp it, either large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another cautery from the fire.  
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is extinguished. 
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another evil does not come upon the patient. 
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when without a court of the artery, one cannot well tighten it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the IV ways that we have said:  
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines placed above which have power to tighten blood; 
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be tied and restrained firmly.  
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring tightening by tightly binding with bandages or placing hot things above, or other similar things, if it does not profit him no.  
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he has not put any medicine present, then he must place his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and retracted.   
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make incisions forward where he has need of cautery and medicine.  
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of wounds 
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and the incisions, and the causes, and the instruments, and the shapes of the cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and have put this chapter up to the knees, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it easier, those who want to.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin these, it is fitting, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason more great caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. 
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.  
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many kinds of people come to treatments.  
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	so they come from those who are so sick with their illness that they die easily because of the severity of their illness, and the greatness of their evil; 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these one must have fear.  
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some who give you their senses, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed; 
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is troublesome.  
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not proper that you allow those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely to those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and benefited from.  
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted. 
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and long memory.  
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen. 
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter for you in chapters, according to what it is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have devised from the head to the feet, so that you find more easily those that you will need.  
dou chief plein d’aigue	The chief full of water 
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head;  
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and to all of those that I have seen it has hastened death; 
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work to such cures. 
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew each day until it could not support it; 
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and  the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the sacrum, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you make a wide split between the two.   
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and also as long as II us, as long as the moisture runs. 
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, you make II slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form: 
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the chief open from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you make III slits in the middle of the chief according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out the moisture completely. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After extracting the slits of drapes and powders, and puts wine and oil in it, and leave thus until the fifth day; 
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then unbind it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the main bandage be fastened, and then give the patient dry meat of a small amount of moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healthy. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess and the assembly of the liquid; 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right side;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never once on the left side. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then cut the abscess opening and fill it with water, and do what you can in that regard. 
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard that you do not cut the artery.  
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and blood comes out so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	of a summary 
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or chest, and the illness is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then as the last resort the cure is cauterization with this one that you cut the two arteries. 
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It therefore behoves, when you are about to cut them, that the patient bends his head backwards.   
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck towards the cloth. 
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are then placed back. 
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the veins of the incisions, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from two parts, as long as the vein reaches to the bone, and this be by the width of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting as I told you across. 
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood will jump out from above continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery doesn't open at the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark incisions and make them to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and this that it is necessary to put the blood out is six fingers' width, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound: 
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone without any suppuration, then cover the wound with a poultice so that no abscess comes, then strain the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	Of migraine  
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes and acute catarrh, for the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit him, then we shall drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.  
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hairs of his temples backward, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not easily found outside than in some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is put back, restrain the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and apply hot water to the place until the artery appears clearly; 
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of which here is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upward with pincers, and carefully separate the webs that are under each part; 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the point of the probe, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw blood from the VI (six) parts, up to III (three);
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the closing of the wound, and bleeding does not occur.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligaments in that same hour, and then, if you see it, so cauterize with the cuticular cautery until the bones are reached;  
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the better work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot complexion. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is aid to finish the humors:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for this reason it is of greater aid to the humors. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on top tightly made tents; 
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, so be it cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with tents, until it is healed;  
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if without court of the artery as long as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain with your hand that the blood be stanched.  
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this present, then put on the place your cloth as long as the blood is clotted, and raise the place with cold water as long as the blood stops, and be restrained as it is fitting. 
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is mooed and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery trenching from two parts, but the trenchings be well thickened to guard longer their heat. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less its heat. 
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it must have between the two blades one doit of thickness, and then when you have signed to enchase the two places, and you put the red iron on until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be kept apart between the two shoulders because it is not completely welded by this cautery at all. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:  
des larmes	of tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend into veins that are above the temple of the head and it does not benefit from any treatment of medicine one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feels or forehead throbbing as if with tremors; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and where the skin is damp and so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are dry, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this treatment.  
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the ancients "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; 
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the clefts be like II must take out all the forehead downward to the eyebrow, and the others II as II ribs from above the papers, and guard yourself from cutting into the arteries that are at II ribs from above the papers; 
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuation of the II jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of III must across joined.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then put the spatula sharp from II parts where here is the shape: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision which is from the temple to the second incision 
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the flesh which is between the two incisions to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract the entire spatula.  
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first incision you put the instrument which is called "cultellar," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: 
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp edge toward the flesh of the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches that which opens towards the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision until the other end.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw blood evenly, and press the place for the blood drawn; 
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that no abscess come there.  
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day untie the bandage, and there administer much boiling water, then ointment of basil with rose oil, and other ointments used to heal wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes  
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When with any eye comes acute cataract, and you see the eyes dim and small, and the vision weakening, and the whites burned;  
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and where it is chiefly they feel sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; 
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then know by these accidents that this matter and this cataract comes from many veins, and the treatment for it that is here, if it is true;
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great cut between the brow, and another of wide in the cheek. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And beginning from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone.   
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	And keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; 
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and bandages. 
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then bind above cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess. 
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as cartilage begins to form, then treat it with drying things, which cause scar tissue to form.  
En teil maniere:	In such manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of flower of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster.  
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it on these wounds to prevent flesh from growing everywhere. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of the ears  
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that which is lodged in the ears is one of four things: 
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or animal matter, or a piece of stone, or similar thing such as iron;  
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, lentils, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or things flowing like water and similarly and similar things. 
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or some other thing that does not fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.  
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer the extraction; 
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;  
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear upwards. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times healing comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come healing, administer to him extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form:  
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the pincers, it's good; 
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If this is not so, then administer extraction to the fine inner part of the small fold.  
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not jump by this means, then make a cane of iron and thrust the head of the cane or perforation of the ear forcefully, and stop that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter there with the cane. 
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment is to make firm, because many times it comes as we have said;  
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come firm in this manner, then take some glue and take the eyes, and put into some instrument which is sharp for that purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; 
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and treat firm.  
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come firm from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to cut open the ear so that an abscess comes out, and spasm;  
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of cutting it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it hangs;  
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And let the opening be like a crescent moon, as long as you reach the stone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it gently with your mouth. 
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment until it is healed.  
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction. 
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be drawn out, then administer a spatula thin and subtle according to this form:  
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And administer an incision of that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think that the grain is wet because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.  
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then that drips into the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a cleansing of conditioners first and wets the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie upon that ear itself where the water is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it leaps out by this means, it is good.  
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If that doesn't happen, then take many stones according to the length of your finger and light ones, and heat them a little in the fire; 
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put them in the patient's ear where it is perforated, and let it be held up by his foot from the other side, and place another stone upon the one that is in the ear; 
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to do this of stone for stone until all the water has gone out, and then it will jump out completely. 
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see it, then take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and set the other end on fire until the end of the reed is burned.  
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then redo the other part of the joints as long as the liquid comes out completely, as we have said in the stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section. 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then administer extraction with tweezers. 
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and where we treat distillations, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: 
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms appear, then treat them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the needle that is shaped like this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the most subtle point in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed to all the vein. 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.  
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, so stop around the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; 
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And be of silver or of iron is narrow below at the small hole, and above over to distill.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation the instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; 
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cautery, and the cautery be in the ear; 
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil be distilled or at the end of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and so is the distillation a little bit heated at the fire thus one distills it in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and guard that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.  
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears 
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who has no pierced ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens to men through a swelling of the wound, or of flesh born within the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from being pushed into the ear, if one cannot see it.  
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes it happens the point of fire is lost, and one sees it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, that which comes in through burning, if it cannot be seen, is of great harm in many situations, and in this one you should put the ear of the patient to the sun.  
et regarde dedens:	and look inside: 
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the apparent hair, then this is how it formed in all of its shape.  
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be acute and cutting before and behind everything full, so that it does not cut the ear; 
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut it lightly until that flesh is entirely removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the hair is implanted in the ear, then take a fine razor and lightly heat it on fire, then put it where the body of the ear is.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard so that you do not wound the nerves of the ear.  
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol;  
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear inflated, it is necessary that you draw the tent and move another moistened tent in cerote that is made of rose oil and wax, as long as the swelling is removed; 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove bleeding which are or treat distillations. 
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal of papers 
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This poultice that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and tweezers, and the scoop a spatula of its roots; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on their place powdered vitriol.  
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without a decortification, then cauterize it with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterize after the incision is useful; 
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they return, because nothing stays from their roots 
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.  
de la gresle	of the groin 
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers things that seem groin in shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "graindin," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the paper; 
li ovraiges est telz:	the work is such:  
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take warning if the graindin moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know 
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	do then the wide cut, then the scrape of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers and the scoop 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot scoop it without feeling a bit of the paper, do not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the opening is great, stitch it together, and care for it until it is healed.  
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply force, because the flesh will restore itself quickly and prevent scarring. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and having grasped the hailstone with tweezers,  hold it and press on one side and the other. 
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hailstone is cut, leave the salty water solution, and care for the area to prevent scarring until the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes 
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that forms in the thin membrane above the eyes, and this happens more often to children than adults, and it grieves their eyes much, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears well up in their eyes; 
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And for this reason they lie on their faces sideways, and sleep on them, and are their papers under their eyebrows moistened that the inflammation and the appearance have covered with the exina which opens in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place to your two thumbs and feel the exina between them.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your bosom; 
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then takes the linen sheet, and prepares a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exina from each part, then puts it on him; 
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and presses with your thumbs on one and other side, so that the exina is assembled in the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then makes in the middle of the moisture with the pointed spatula a cut wide, and be not more than the wound that one makes to the vein opening; 
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin smooth until you reach the bottom
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases the bottom comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat. 
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then extract with all your strength between your two fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as it is spread. 
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep that you do not add in the incision, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not squeeze it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the bottom does not open at the beginning of the incision, then carefully widen the incision slightly until it opens;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten dressings in vinegar and water, and put it on top, and secure with bandages.  
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if it is to such men who grind seed and put it on top to corrupt the moisture that has settled. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure until it is healed.  
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place an abscess, then cure with plasters soothing until it is healed. 
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the papers  
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in papers hairs arise adjusted other than the nature, and are spoiled, they harm the eyes, and bring many diseases like accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; 
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and it is the cure according to IV manners:  
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine sharp according to this one that is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitch or by canes, according to this one that I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your own, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.  
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is turned, it is good; 
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put a needle into the whole thread above;  
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and be it beside the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow beside these hairs, and pull the thread upward to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor; 
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs adjusted, to the whole spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small; 
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then place on top of the paper a figure of an eye, as the leaf of myrtle, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided into all.  
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it is necessary, one should cut a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is. 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make a total of spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear up to small. 
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the awl in one of the two corners where the kernel is, and then peel it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the wool thread fine, and wipe the blood, and make air-dry the superfluity of the hairs above the two eyebrows to any sticky things, if you wish to do this. 
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this is not so, if you have no care, then leave the stitch and the hairs until three days or four. 
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitch of drying and constricting things, because the paper revives to the adhesion of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	and if by another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and that you draw the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three ounces wide according to the shape that is here. 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut what rises over the small forces equally according to the form which is here: 
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you lack the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or one with thread, and put it in the middle of the figure.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And put the other thread beside the large tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between the two threads equally;  
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over what you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed.   
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cress and similar soothing ointments;  
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted. 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	so it is necessary that you use what we have said of the incision; 
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suture in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of wounds is according to this form:  
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you would convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make two ligatures by art, and two subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are;  
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two parts where you hold the threads; 
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble the one and the other subtly above what surmounts the paper of the eye, and restrain the two ligatures from the two parts formed;  
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it so for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and carry itself, until it comes away by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he is late, if he does it with force, then treat him until he is healed. 
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is soldered, and if the paper has been lifted, and they will no longer prick hairs; 
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.  
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you prick a subtle needle, and it puts the silk thread soft and subtle; 
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the jaws and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then arrange in the chase the other thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the two threads. 
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on your own healthy one. 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And be facing the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and small work. Then put the needle into all the chase in the root of the hair near it, and make it pierce through the paper carefully as long as you pull it above the natural hair; 
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the root, and put it back into the wound if there are one or two or three or more.  
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull your hand until the hairs come out of the entire wound on the paper with the natural hair. 
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the wound away from its bottom all along the line that you have arranged, until the wound comes out of the hole above and you see it with your eyes.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore if you treat the wound and thread it, and close the eye and let it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and flesh grows above.  
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hairs of natural wool, and let it be lifted along with it, until they grow longer, and then lift it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rot of the eye 
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called 'aleacrati' or the rot comes to the eye, there are two ways it appears.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One natural, and one unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens through sudden wounds, or incisions, or cauteries, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside a linen pad, and tie it until it is healed. 
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not proper that you use in the cure of them things that dry and restrict 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than the first.  
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening things, such as fennel; 
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of water or aloe and linseed seeds be cooked, and diacoylon ointment melted in any oil, and enclose a tent, and treat with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are nothing but treatments of this illness so that it does not return according to the form that it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is called 'axacrati', and is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and split and cautery and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of the work in it is that you prick a needle, in which it has the double thread, and you put it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes into the two shoulders of the flesh; 
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then having the flesh above to the whole needle, and the cut to the spatula wide.  
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; 
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If those are not, then take the scraper and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits or cuts inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the shoulders of the two splits be the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and be made angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name « I greiche»; 
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that his ribs are raised and out of place, from what follows on the paper, then adjust the two separated parts, and stitch them with a thread of wool. 
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and dressings, until it is healed.  
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a cut or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before;  
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then insert between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said. 
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it does return the figure to its natural form;  
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is convenient for work and instruments in many dispositions.  
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper 
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soldering happens to men's hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with egg white, and cannot move or do its natural works, then you must put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up. 
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and the extent of pinches, as long as you cut what is stuck to the spatula carefully, which should not be too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too thick and blinds the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision be, with which you scrape the assembled one, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healed all of that assembled, and do not at any time in the salty eye water, and the lifting of fresh water, and of collyrium. 
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put over the eye wool moistened in honey; 
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use the collar and things inside until it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye 
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the angle is according to II manners: 
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and similar to the hard silk fabric, and another which is not at all nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one burns it, it cannot be done.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appearances begin towards the large tear duct, and cross a little here and there until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then he opens his eyes. 
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as the pliers of small pleats, and it upward.  
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put upon it hair of horse, or of ox, or of cow, and the thread strong; 
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the angle, and pierce it through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and bring it upward, and sear all the hair along the side of the angle which follows the small muscle and silk to the hair until the head, then cut away the remaining part at the root of the tear throughout the whole spatula finely and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear so that through the incision does not come the body of tears commonly.   
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and no time is the angle extended solely to the thread as we have said.  
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	after the scraping one has all the spathe of what this form is: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the pricked point is not pierced.  
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision put in the eye a bit of ground flaxseed, and from the collar made of lead, and let it until the other day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure that which is necessary until it is healed. 
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines. 
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the finger carefully above it, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pain increases, then distill from your mouth into the eye a colure made of litarge and red colure and finely ground sel, and plug the eye until the next day; 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess, then apply poultice, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed. 
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear duct harms the eye due to great annoyance, then suspend it with a small hook and cut off a part, but not too much, so that no tear comes out; 
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the oil collyrium red which is made of lead ore.  
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the charcoal that arises on the iris 
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red charcoal, and covers the iris and rests on the eyelids and turns them to the fire, and seems like a rose of balance. 
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is that the patient puts his head in a sound place, then the worker opens the eyes, and coils all that charcoal with suitable tweezers to those, and sustains it with strength. 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first charcoal, and go on cutting all the way to the end, and be careful that you do not blind the eye during the work. 
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the corner and to the small forces of which one removes the white part, as how the form after this chapter it demonstrates. 
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then use the oil of garlic crushed or you distill red cochineal and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top the oil with cotton wool mixed with a bit of egg white, so that it is sure to form a hot abscess;  
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not remain there, and the skin surrounds it, and you doubt about the hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess. 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until the flesh is set in the oil by this method.  
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless, it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil to the natural way; 
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work. 
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes 
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Several are veins red that are covered on the eye, and they take from sight their work and weaken the eye every days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary that you first look at if the eye, in which it is, and apart from, and there is no other malady besides only the seb 
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then you apply in this manner: 
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient that he put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins to the whole body according to his wisdom, and let the threads be subtle double according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two threads by degrees in the body according to this form: 
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then you wind tightly those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins outside of the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut any other veins 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you will have done this, distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt that which remains of the scab. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, do a poultice on the eye with things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; 
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces: 
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye 
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror is called “arissati” fistula:  
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with cautery and with a burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut into the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of which this form is made. 
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "sharp head", and it is made of fire iron to the head's front, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:  
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is reset. 
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.  
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the parts are soldered together, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bone is soldered, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew or become inflamed, and no bad accident comes to it, know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, if there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the wound according to this form: 
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the shoulder be of iron in three angles, and let the shaft be thinned up to the chief as you see here: 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes into his in this way if he holds his hand on his forehead; 
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows back and hardens the union, it will go to the forehead; 
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	so it is a lighter thing for the patient.  
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the issue of the eye 
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open throughout all and they do not come to trouble to the nose, nor diminish, then it is necessary that you bind the patient. 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then cleanse, then place a suction cup or haverel without wounding to suck, then put upon the eye a liniment made of wool and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and emplaster it above with bandages and cloths.  
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one in IV, and then put one upon another according to the quantity that the eye has need. 
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then restrain from above with a hard bandage, and begin again the suction cups to suck without wounding;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye restrained day and night, and if the liniment softens, then it is necessary that you restrain it much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then bone the join after the day and the nut, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good. 
se ce non;	If this no;  
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then begin again the poultice and bandages and the bone and the leeches until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the unfolding of woolen cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes in the woolen cloth, then open it, and there come forth pieces like the grain of resin, and is esperatable to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it cover, the work is such that you thrust a needle in the root of the lower part until the top, then thrust another needle where there is the double thread from the lacrymal; 
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; 
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the wool around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put upon the other eye half in an abundance of egg;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it remain until the child falls with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and at no time should the wound be restricted by the grape on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows a great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eye, and enter it immediately. 
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.  
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bow that is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water. 
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the bow coming up to your eyes; 
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be careful, and do not let it descend and become disordered the light, and let the patient see things as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend from below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not apparent as we have said 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and feel on the cornea where it joins with the conjunctiva and the crown, as long as the bowel protrudes; 
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is protruded, instill in the eye hot sharp water mixed with honey, or sharp water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have shown the appearances of the waters in their division, and what it is necessary for to consider.  
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, facing away from the sun, and tie the healthy eye and hold it very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right; 
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; 
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the width of a finger in that white part of the eye to the side of the tear duct, then push the instrument which is called 'almagda' skillfully, and thrust your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing; 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is fitting that the measure of the almagda's path be at the midpoint of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;  
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in this paper for the clarity of the corneal veil, and then place the instrument up to there where the water is, then express it below one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, if the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.  
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rests the little one, and if the water ascends the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and she does not ascend, gently withdraw algada rotating your hand  poco a poco.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in water a little of silk gum, and leave that eye inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put outside the eye plugged with wool or cloth soaked in rose oil and honey, and tie it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on a mixture above with an abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce thus only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep in, but make it subtle, then put almond as we have said. 
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, equip the patient with a poultice beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place. 
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And be free from all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then he unties him in this very dark house, and tests his sight, and makes him see some things, and then he puts the bandage back on until the seventh day. 
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not good that you do these things in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you apply this, because the water rises hastily. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the dressing of this which soothes the abscess. 
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is soothed, then untie the sight and put upon his face the little rim to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he leaves the house little by little, and becomes again in his state;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that none of disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they did alchemy with almonds, to which they added water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients. 
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing.  
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the shapes of almonds, for those who do not know them see them. 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are of grain properly:  
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the chief be like a bird's head of this same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles. 
de la char sor le neis	From the wood, on the root
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	At no time do roots of wood grow together in different ways, for that reason there are none which seem like scorpions with many feet; 
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such ones where the wood is cracked of bad color, and if the wood has a good color.  
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that kind of wound which is sore, and not gaping, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; 
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and throw the onion on that wound, and the fumes;  
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then carefully take with a sharp and subtle spatula what you can sustain to it until you know that the wound is all cleaned 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains which cannot be taken, then open it with all the sharp and light instruments so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if there is a boil or abscess, apply a poultice as it is proper; 
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is malignant boils, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is seared and all the wounds are removed, then pour on either hot water or wine. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the nose works, and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is sound. 
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut. 
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore, it is necessary that you put a thread of linen slightly thick into it, and let it be tied with our hands, and have between each knot space  one or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's shoulder into the wool in his hand and pull it out smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth; 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do children like this at school, and it is easy for him who wants to do it;  
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head which comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head which comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart carefully as we who are wool;
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the nose has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the wool, wipe the blood, and moisten the wool in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight into the nostril as before; 
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of flesh; 
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then place on it a bandage of wool for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.  
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines onto it:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a funnel, and the lead similarly.  
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see fit, make a closed funnel, and let the instruments be full for purging the head;  
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have a handle to hold the head when one heats the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	from that it draws onto the skin  
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times on the head appears a disease called "tellum," and it grows and becomes very large, so much that it is a terrible sight to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and the bone all out, then put on its place the cautery or the ardent medicine; 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays to cut it until it is large, then take ward if it is hard, of dull color, of poor feeling;  
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if one does not touch it with iron because it is an ulcerated abscess, for when one cuts it any time, much evil comes to the patient; 
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not dull in color, and you see that one can completely cut it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the abscess is cut and sewed 
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these work-like cartridges, it profits little, for in no humans. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, first see if the wound is fresh with all its blood. 
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then join the two lips together with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.  
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two lips together with a suture, and restrain them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood, and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly. 
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips 
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In men's hands  happen inside the lips abscesses hard, seeming like grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore it behooves you to turn the lips, and split open each knot, and take them with tweezers and cut them in every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then put on their place after the incision of powdered vitriol, as long as the blood is stopped; 
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it heal itself, and cure its place with dry things until it is healed.   
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times  flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so it behooves you to support it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the blood to clot
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the place vitriol ground, or other powders restraining and drying; 
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens many times, then cauterize it a second time; 
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery; 
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for cauterizing.
des sordens	of the [burning] irons
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled to the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores which are ugly and rough.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are [the] tooth black and yellow and towards (a direction), as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and they are the tooth stinking.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin be in your saint (a term of respect), and raise [or open] the teeth or sores as much as possible until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus do of blackness and greenishness, and jaundice and other spots, as long as they are mottled; 
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes those that are at the first layer, it is good; 
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all removed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have need of diverse kinds of instruments for removing them, according to what the work shows, because the rasp used to remove outside teeth has other forms than the one used to remove between the teeth;  
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to draw out as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a most high substance until on's has no excuse for failing to draw it out. 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to drink milk, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth aching. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is a toothache, and drinks milk from the healthy tooth. 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And nevertheless the pain does not depart for this, as long as the evil is present, because we have already seen it happen to our patients. 
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are well certain of the tooth aching, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth entirely. A spatula strong to ward off the gum on all sides; 
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your two tweezers or delicate pincers at the first pock and pock, until it is well loosened, then firmly affirm the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And let the shoulder of the patient be in your holy between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out freely, then take any of these instruments and put it inside each side lightly, and move it as you did at first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, then it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the holes are; 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you extract it subtly with pliers, so that it does not break when extracting.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is necessary to work very carefully around the gums to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness break sometimes the chariot, and do not bring it to what we have recounted; 
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring sometimes by the incision of those great sickness from the roots that remain, or because of the chariot that they break, as we have often seen. 
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt.  
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, as often happens, apply a powder of vitriol to the place. 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that does not work, cauterize it.  
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, as to how one pulls teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; 
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large limbs so that they do not bend when working, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold tight. 
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth 
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the working area, it is necessary that you put on top of it moistened cotton in butter every day or two, until the bone is softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri," so that the bone seems like a beak when it is handled.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and inside they are made like a file, and this is its form: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali," which is to say a chisel, so this is its form: 
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through those, it is good. 
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If those do not, with the help of all your instruments, of which the forms come after here:  
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two reins, of which this is the form: 
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the fashion of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pliers, of which here is the form: 
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are.  
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted. 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise masters subtle ones find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such maladies where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others, and if one breaks not the cartilage or other bones, or it hurts, then he seeks the instruments that are proper, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone so it does not escape, but that it can be held and removed. 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the place with suitable medicine for those, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument: 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgins, then it behooves you to know if the teeth are born after the teeth and are not in their right place, and one cannot file them or smooth them: 
adonques lou raie;	Therefore the filing;  
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is joined with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and it is similar to a small beak, and be of sharp iron at its summit: 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope peck and peck in hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and for those that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then use a type of file as here is its form: 
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; 
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in filing a tooth bit by bit in hands lightly, so that it does not move until it chips;  
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the filing at the end to absolutely nothing, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches 
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When a front tooth aches, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on it when he chews without pain, and you have cured them with restraining medicines, and this is of no use;  
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then it is necessary to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver wire turns green and spoils, but gold never changes.   
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be medium neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; 
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth crowded together, then take the thread and bring it doubled between the two sound teeth, then put the chiasmus between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you come skillfully to the sound tooth on the other side. 
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin the covering again up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and skillfully, until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the chiasmus of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the sound tooth, and put it so that it does not bleed the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the threads slip, then restrain it with another thread.  
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it stays and serves thus throughout its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls, then it is put back in its place, one by one, as we have said; 
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and no one should interfere who is not skilled and experienced, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from bleached bone, and it is put in the place where there is a deficiency, and it is restrained as we have said, and it stays and serves thus for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the root of the tongue  
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this root which comes under the tongue or naturally; 
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a wound soldered  
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; 
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve of the tongue, as long as the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is hardness or numbness, and this is a sign of injury, then put the probe and cut in the wide area that ligament. 
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and keep that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath;  
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, raise the head and neck of the patient with a sponge or a cloth of water and cold, then put under the tongue a tent of linen. 
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the bandage the patient each night, so that the wound cannot close. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, put on top of the area powdered vitriol;  
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with the sluggish cautery, which is good for this. 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,  
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it of a reddish or black color or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, because it is an ulcer; 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then apply the sponge, and scrape it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on both sides; 
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the wound does not heal to your work, then put on powdered vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you extract everything thoroughly; 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then raise the level of ash and soil, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes inside the throat come boils that are called “godaths,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:  
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If they are hard abscesses of small size and dusky color, do not touch them with iron at all. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron at all, nor for the bleeding. 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it is rotten, and then you will break it open, or it would burst by itself;  
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, then have prepared the instrument to cut, but first look whether the abscess feels warm and is appeased.   
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hands, and open the mouth and place the instrument between his fingers, and press the tongue down with all of the instrument.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and be of silver or iron fine as well as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Cannot you press the tongue to all these instruments, and you see the abscess, if you take the needle and place it into the marrow, and drive it upwards more than you can. 
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not draw anything from the tissues with it, then cover the instrument from this, which is the form that seems like a force. 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and nonetheless the head is curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharpened on one side, and blunt on the other. 
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have cut one of the marrow, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and plain water, and if the evacuation of blood occurs, gargle the patient with water, or decoctions of pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped. 
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal until he is sound 
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and no times are abscesses born in the throat other than the two tonsils, so cut them thus as the two tonsils equally. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I medicined a woman of an abscess that she had born inside the throat, that is to say the abscess of small size; 
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had I well nearly closed the whole throat so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained thus one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high raised that it had been driven into two furrows by its two openings.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened then, and put in one the incision, then drew forth the pus and a great portion of bowels; 
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then made another incision in the other opening of the two, and opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue;  
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after having drained the abscess with these poultices, and having cauterized a part of it, 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus was unplugged the conduit of the throat in the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at that abscess for a long time; 
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; 
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I closed it and cauterized it inside the throat;
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remained without growing; 
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I departed from those parts, and only God did what came after me.  
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the grape is ripe and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular"; 
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is smaller and round, then it is called "grape".  
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the head of the abscess is appeased, and it is thin, then you must cut it; 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded assembled and is not long; 
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a rusty color or black, so it is necessary that you make the incision into it.  
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It therefore behooves, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention above. 
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the awl into the uva, and treat it with vinegar, and cut to the II instruments that I have said in the incision of the II almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; 
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech;  
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and treat it until it is healed.  
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, you should use an instrument to cauterize the senses that cause fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head on your healthy side, and then presses his tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confides with very sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too light; 
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And in employ the head of this instrument, for this is its form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have or take a hair or on which one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the grape; 
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles move from his mouth to the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the fleece; 
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand to all the medicine and press on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it turn red and the bites of the medicine are calmed;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it on any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton dries on the grape; 
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and fall after IV or V days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to begin the fire cautery of medicine again, restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine. 
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.  
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision. 
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamine and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and put some water in it, and let it boil; 
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and on top of the pot have the instrument prepared according to this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And be it of silver or of iron, and let one of the shoulder blades be put in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, until the eye is dead. 
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the eye begins again, until it dries out, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things happen. 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And make not this further than at the decline of the hot abscess.  
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a vein and put inside the head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat. 
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Because the egg white does not let the vapor burn the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it has been applied to the throat bone or spine of fish, or any thing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore it is necessary that you draw what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all your instrument, so that you see move the thing. 
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach.  
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps if the thing is thrown out by vomiting; 
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; 
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie it to the sponge, and then swallow it; 
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it arrives at the place, it will swell, and then you will draw further.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come further than what we have said, take the instrument of plank according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head held high. 
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that the whole does not close up, nor push inside the bone. 
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better that the patient themselves pushes the instrument, because they know where the thing is hard.  
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If he pushes down, or he draws it outwards with all of the instrument evenly, until it is fully out. 
de la sansue de la gorge	of the cutting of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No time is a remedy for the wound, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when those do not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, treat it with all little forceps, or subtle pincers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put fire at the end of the dog's hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient stands of water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full a glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and put it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often. 
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the patient feels the water, he will spit.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if she does not spit as we have said, then fume the patient with asafoetida, to the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the grape; 
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will purge without vomiting.  
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that put the head of the instrument; 
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then put your fumigation in, and the patient puts the head of the pipe into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the palate. 
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the bloodletting will now come forth, and if it does not flow, then begin fumigation again many times. 
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and drink no water;  
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And thus it is necessary that she be cured by this treatment.   
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats bloodletting is, when it can be seen, similar to bent pliers for entering into the throat.  
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has the sharpness of a file, so that whoever takes it, they cannot let go. 
et vez ci la forme:	And here is the form:  
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those who remember afterwards in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size. 
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is in two manners one of which is in its own likeness, and from that which it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the limbs where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if abscesses should not be pierced until the boil is ripe according to its completion;  
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if to such ones it is necessary to pierce when they are mature and do not ripen according to their completion, like abscesses which are near the joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it be as long as it is rotten, by chance the ligaments and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or if the abscess is near the principal member and if you delay the piercing until it ripens, it will harm the principal member; 
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is near the foundation, pierce it thus when it is ripe;  
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not appropriate that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion, except for the one close to its base, so that it may not be further inflamed and become elongated inside, and there comes a fistula. 
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and may not heal in a long time.  
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is done according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the loosening and softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you make the perforation where it depends more from the abscess, and where it opens freely. 
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be long and in the middle of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where it has no flexion. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that are dislocated, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the puncture open as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, then the body of the worm will be lengthened from it, and it is full of much filth. 
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and deepen it.  
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess which are perceived according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if it has such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the heart and cover it; 
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become like a curtain, and is deadened, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils; 
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if it has such ones that are cut into three angles, and if it has such ones which one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of anger;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if it has such or one makes a round incision, and other incisions and seeming cutting. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, as if it were a superficial abscess, you must pierce it fully;  
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and it has become swollen greatly, and you pierce it, if do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a portion. 
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing from it directly;  
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times, large to small, until all the pus is gone; 
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Likewise if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman carrying, or a young child, or an old man decrepit.  
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes bursts forth with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not worried about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; 
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a flat incision, administer pads of linen or old cotton; 
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must put a pad in each one so that they come against each other; 
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and have sewn it together, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint scraped from linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day; 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the abscess will heal and treat it with ointment until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the flow of blood happens in your work, so administer cold water and ease it, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, administer governance and treatment, and the powders that I have said in this book. And if it is during winter, and the part or the abscess is very nervous, then you must put on pads and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in this state and the parts are fleshy, then it is necessary that you place above them soft cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cooled oil, until the third day, as we have said. 
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it, as is proper, until it is healed.  
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: 
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how one should go before the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.  
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where boils on the head come small abscesses, and they are manners of ours that are in cloths, as the joiner of a hinge, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such that they have moisture as well as boils; 
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are some that are hard and stony in their size, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary to it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the hip are such that you should consider all instruments which are called "entromissoire," because their form comes here afterwards, what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so lift it from above with a long stick.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving the hair that contains that moisture, because it returns again when one leaves it alone; 
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present 
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day.  
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and cover those who remain from the dampness. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain damp. 
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with ointment as convenient, until it is healed.  
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds in fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, of length; 
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and insert your probes and its lining from all sides, and put all your care into draining the pus where it lies.  
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery does contrary, then do what I have told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is purulent, and with cutting and caring as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting above the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if to some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of those which had abscesses that I opened or chiefs of an old woman;  
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess also like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; 
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had done any of it, they would have made the wound as well as with a stone.  
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses or chiefs, it was that those which come at the chiefs of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that mucus flows out. 
et les cure si com il covient.	and the cure as it is proper.
des scrophules	Of the scrofulous ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come in other parts or of the body, and are bad, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its fold, like the pustule and abscess of the chief, as we have said; 
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the resemblances of these scrophules are many.  
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in which therefore you see good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not at all sore to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the duct, and is not very deep.  
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is proper that you cut it from above, and the skin is removed from each side, and the two lips of the heart are brought together with sutures, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head.   
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and treat it point by point, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let it not be scraped too much or too deeply, so that your hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.   
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powder that stops blood, and hold the wound. 
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.  
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then if there remain any small pustules, cut them and remove them with your finger.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not necessary to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread and let it hang, without harming. 
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then that there is no longer any superfluity for the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more. 
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it thus as that said before, in dependence, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. 
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleansed, then the ointment cure  preventing flesh, until it is healed.   
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; 
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it is the scripture of their word.  
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have squint-eyes, it is fitting that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cut.  
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And one does not make help by those, because all the veins and the passages of the sick are to those who have abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the almonds.   
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four a small slit through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage. 
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those who are so cuttable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough.  
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the whole incision, then cut the keel until it comes to the channel;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and shun the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; 
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the mucus of the channel that flows out from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice; 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a while.  
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed from which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound near the heart, and sew them entirely together, except for the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.  
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus is kept from death; 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the sickness is passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and care for it, until it was healed; 
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.  
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called for the healer, and I found him as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and knew well that it had not been cut vein nor led forward except to the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and so I bandaged the wound, and cured it until it was healed; 
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there came to the lady nothing but that she was hoarse of voice, and returned after to her disposition;  
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for because of this I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is much in women; 
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental.  
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	In the natural one there is no engine. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And if there is fear, it does not suit to work to do more than in the one that is small, and prove and search all around the introducer: 
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as our fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as we cut the ours, and the trail at all its top, if there is one.  
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And enclose well then, and cure it as it suits, until it be perfectly healed. 
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many manners of ours there are, which I will say all the appearances of;  
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it suits that I say all the difference that is between our and exit. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that exit is sometimes feverish holding, until the boiling has passed, and is accomplished the rotting;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Therefore rests the fever and the heat.   
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a fluid, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large.  
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to their appearances, whether gray or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.  
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of this disease that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument that is called "entromissore," according to what its form will be or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of incising abscesses as we do is that you prick or moisten them more than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the interpositor, and take care in those that jump out.  
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, do it as I have said of other abscesses; 
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is fat, therefore make it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape it on each side and guard the coat where it lies so you draw it healthy with the new. 
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.  
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it returns to us many times. 
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if some remains and the wound grieves you, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and strain the wound, and put above soothing things, a hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the abscess is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and cure it from that which generates flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein opening is contrary to you or otherwise hurry and use the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, as long as the wound suppurates, and rests the boiling of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cover what remains from outside. 
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the  in-introducing instruments, and they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small; 
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of them: 
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like needles with which one sews the sores, and they are of citrine iron, or iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more proven from black plumbum to enclose the curves of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and are of III ways: 
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the openings.  
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the incisions are of many resemblances, as you see here: 
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if incisions which have II curves of III ways also;  
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if incisions which have III curves, and are also of III ways; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if incisions which have II curves, and incisions of one curve only, and are of III ways; 
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.  
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these which one makes are trenching, and there are some which do not cut further than one part, which we scrape the veins with, for that reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introitors are the lancets put back in handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses; 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three ways: 
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see; 
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one should only use them in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar parts;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never is another instrument small, resembling the peelings of fists, according to this form, for which one leeches blood; 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and place it once in its place that is suitable for cutting veins and arteries, and never return according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do they swell the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like a woman's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should be according to this form of this line b. to g.;
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed. 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the mamacle leans downward, and is softened by its size like it does with women, then make two incisions above, in two similar slits. 
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g..
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and those things that are necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, for the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then it behooves you to fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it so until it mends the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the asses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are types of hard scrofulas which have ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then use the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment afterwards to it as long as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of a scrofula, then make it as we have said in incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound is rent inwards, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sewn together, many times abscesses come about, and this also happens to the vein that has been inflamed and abscessed. 
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you know this is because of the artery, then the abscess will be long and spread out;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel its pulling.  
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when this is because of the vein, it appears red and swollen from without.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is under the armpits and elbows and neck and in many other places, and is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to use the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge should also use it, and in those who are inflamed by an artery that is cut from above the skin long; 
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the waist with quick movements, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered; 
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in II lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in the temples; 
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point the place which is between the two ties with an introducer as long as the blood that is there issues forth, and let it be clean the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the cure that injures the bow, until the tie hangs; 
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure those with ointment coming up to them, as long as they are healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand those that you can from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be the double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie up the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of its parts to the two shoulders with a thread; 
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is not far enough, then reinsert another needle through all the thread under the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places. 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut open the abscess until the superfluities are out, then cut away the superfluity of the kernel and leave what is tied.  
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips, and in all their joints where there are abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and is more disposed without pain; 
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is forcibly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not felt throughout the body, but beneath the heart; 
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it moves well in every direction, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	for chance, he might go into a contraction; 
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and the one who is at the top or on the forehead, it feels the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; 
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with a thread and remove the skin, then clean it out and suture the wound, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its appearance, and the root is subtle, and the head large; 
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are some small ones and very large ones;  
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw the man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were cracked open, and pus oozed out of them.  
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI ⅓, and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the article is white and moist and with a fine root;  
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if it cut with a wide spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the cutting comes many times too great bleeding, and if the blood does not stop well, then hasten to cauterize.  
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a thread of silk well made, and tie the articulation as we have said, and let him leave it for days;  
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the silk thread as long as it holds the articulation, and heal by means of it without labor; 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, then fear to cut it even for the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return;  
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the flesh which is of a yellow color and poor without blood and milky appearance. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess which has broken open, and I will come to its treatment after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound has healed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery of wound or fissure of the syphons, and is on the belly and in some of the swellings as they have in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the sheath and by the opening of the bulb, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from different exits.  
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two ends it rises up, and then returns, and by chance it may be tight, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all; 
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and is filled according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you observe whether its appearance is for the blood of an artery, or of a vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So you must let the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bulb, then you must order the patient to keep his arm straight, and be stretched all straight, then reign in everything around the belly; 
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to gently hold between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with the spatula, then bring half of the abscess above to the whole great incision; 
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let it be held in place by the linen band. 
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work on the half of the abscess extended on the linen, and put your index finger in, and search for the intestine. 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the linen, untie it, and bring the intestine to the outside of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it with the incision, and cut off the excess. 
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make it pierce. 
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in IV places above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave their place until it rots, and the dead flesh falls off by itself. 
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it as it should be, and treat the abscess as we have said. 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it is right, and close the place. 
dou chancre	Of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the appearances of sores, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say the sore arises in the marsh, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and ancients have said that when a sore is in a place where one can scrape it like a sore which is in the nipples, and in the buttock, and in similar places, and it should be entirely removed when it is at its beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed it before me.  
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black coles. 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then let him heal if there is a manifest fullness, then make the patient healthy again in place to do the work; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw your incisions or ulcers, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything. 
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out completely, and firmly press the place with your hand or anything, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished. 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure of other cures until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron. 
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only lit;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these II resemblances:  
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and hypoarche, because it is a mortal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclitse" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as a cough and solution of the belly and similar things; 
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then do this work.  
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Raise the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis, then take the spine spatula according to this form:  
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At its point, and altogether it should not be so deeply inserted that it can come to the intestine when one inserts it, and do not let it pierce. 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if the dropsy is in its place towards the intestines:  
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If it is necessary that you cut above the bud, III does right below the armpit.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the bud III does.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is because of the moisture, let it be on the right side, and it is not appropriate that the patient lie on the split so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place; 
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it out, and raise your hand to the whole spatula between the skin and the sifac as much as when you are scraping at the quantity of a nail or inquirin.  
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the sifac until the spatula comes to the place where it should be, and this is the place of the water, then push the water out, and put this instrument back as much as this.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a fine silver chain, and is of iron or archaut lighter, and has in the lower part a small hole. 
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on costs one side, III holes.  
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And II of one side, and I of the other; 
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is cut as a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather with:  
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top is the alemale, so that when the instruments come to the point, it descends now onto the instrument. 
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty therefore half or the third part, for if you empty more than is proper in this hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death. 
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue of the patient signifies, and his pulses; 
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then treat the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now by the heart which stops the hole that is on the syfac, for this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner. 
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering these things, and treat with water a small quantity.  
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this no day, and keep from heating until it remains but a little bit of water. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him much water, then treat with burying or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and it will get better. 
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No time is born a child who has no opening in the shaft, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, he must immediately discern with great care the entire spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or pierce the subtle cloth of plank, and tie it and keep it so for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, then be removed the clot, and do pee, and then put it back. 
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and perhaps this is not necessary, because the urine coming forth does not let it close. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, so are medicated with the balm of plantain, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the prepuce in its place are pale, because none are born with the prepuce at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before pulling their penis upward; 
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the end, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies often on his back, and the head of the penis and the scrotum are lifted like a feather so that the prepuce falls in the middle as it should. 
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care of blood loss which comes often, and if it happens, then the person who is skilled in staunching blood should treat the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this ailment comes to the shaft, and is an appearance of ugly flesh. 
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones;  
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	so it behooves you to prick them with a fine needle, and scrape and clean them all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment.   
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with Diaphynicon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color and discharge, then you must bring it a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have scraped it, and if the ailment is in the body of the shaft, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the ailment which is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is healed, then its cure defer. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it together, make sure the head of the bone is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shank and groin. 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it is necessary to shave away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the rind of quince and verbena, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps with two arrangements together: 
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, for the removal of blood, and for corruption.  
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the bone is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or drive a chain of lead into the bone, and piss the patient's urine upon it.  
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or where there is an ulcer or abscess, then it behooves you to scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the cords are loosened, and the tip of the penis is free on all sides; 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is a grievous thing to speak of these, then it behooves you to scrape it with a spatula, little by little, at the head of the penis and the skin; 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then gently separate them, and put in between them a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water, so that it does not become raw again;
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; 
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Nevertheless, when we do this work of our will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for healing. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not say circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have more than what we have acquired by experiment.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcisions in Dal, and with force, and with a whole knife. 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If they were to cut the foreskin because there are two layers, and by chance one is cut above and the other below stays. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or it must be cut again, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is called Dal, the tip of the member is not well ensured. 
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And in the purification of the anus, by chance the fire escapes, and the work runs away, and many times they are born so that they don't need purification, and I have wanted it.  
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification that is done with force to the whole line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	Because when you press your hand, they are equal in length throughout the whole soul tenses. 
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But that the child should be well enclosed within the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And be the manner of the first work as this is that you make think the child, if he understands, that you do not to him force only to tie the thread around the rod so only, and then do make him rejoice in all the manners that you can; 
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then do make him stay between your hands straight, and return the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; 
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then thrust your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and the drive in up as long as the head of the rod be in;  
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie under one pock to the other lien; 
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold it as II dues by the second lieeure to the pouch and to the index, and cut between the II liens, then lift the head upwards gently and drive the head of the rod;  
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood run drop by drop, for it is the cure. 
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and over the powder I drape it with a cloth of a boiled egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with rosemary oil good and fresh, and let it remain until the next day, and treat it with another treatment as long as it is healthy. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces in the clarification is this: 
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be held and should be sharp, and the shoulders also as large as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the clarification is when the cores inside are at the incision; 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it behooves you to extend it to your fingernail so that the pus makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then cut it. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they exceed three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, let him leave it as long as the abscess chafes is appeased, and scar lightly. 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you cut it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all. 
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore cure the place of things sound wound with powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut too much of the heart, and it goes upwards, it will not harm. 
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is of a stone's lodging, or of blood congealed, or of a bowel, or of fatty flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in its location or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can. 
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released and; 
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction to it with all the instrument that is called "syringe", of which this is the form:  
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of silver subtly light feathered like the feather of a bird; 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and be the handle a palm long and a half, and be subtle at the head.  
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the issuing of the urine is that you take the doubled thread and tie it at the head a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the excess of the wool and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; 
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards toward the head; 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it come to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because of who leads or where it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then extend the thread throughout all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and wash the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood come in the bladder, or there is rot gathered, and you see it distilled with sharp and medicaments, so do it to all the instrument which is called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has III openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; 
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the legs are covered so that the medication is such that it well stops the penis without addition, if one can suck out the moisture, and push when necessary; 
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see fit to place your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and treat with the thread that is inside. 
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you will draw the moisture to the catheter, and then firmly reinsert the thread inside.  
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	then the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it. 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one cleanses the bladder:  
si est ci:	it is here: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher.  
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below to the groin where the connection falls. 
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to cleanse the bladder inside it, then tie it between the two breasts using a thick doubled cord, and warm the moistened bag over the fire. 
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the tip of the clyster into the rectum, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder.  
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it a circle, and pierce it roundly within. 
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then put the strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dial, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument. 
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.  
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have just said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And we have said the difference between stones engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work by cutting; 
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis; 
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; 
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I open the harene, and it tightens the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then it disappears.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and with many of these leaps its foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is light the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move them downward, so that the hip descends to the level of the bladder, and it comes away from its high position sometimes.  
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downward. 
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then grasp it and touch it inside.  
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the hip in that space, then hasten now to cut above the hip. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall upon touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult who has completed puberty. 
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and shove it in its foundation, and grasp the hip, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press upon your loin, and put it out at the fire where you wish to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; 
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he puts in the spatula cutting, of which this is the form: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make between that which is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; 
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight above the stone, and your loins be close or foundation, and let the cut be transverse so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure if the loins which is or foundation, that it leaps outwards without work;  
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there are such stones which have angles, and margins:  
si est griés a issir;	If they are broken to be removed; 
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is one that is soft, appearing like a gland, and rounded, whose exit is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To those then which have angles and margins, make the incision larger; 
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, then it behooves you to extract it with tweezers that are also like a file at the top, so as to squeeze the stone until it does not escape.  
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put underneath the instrument subtle and curved at the top;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge I the opening, and if the blood does not come, strain with vinegar.  
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, first push the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the tract, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are more. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be stitched up, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:  
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or the urine comes back through the way the wound cannot heal. 
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless you exert yourself to drain it, or to break it with pliers, until you extract it in pieces;  
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have accomplished your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put over it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then support the patient on their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you set it free, if there is oil and water, then treat it with dyacin ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess comes in the wound and corruptions, and a clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is known in such a manner that without suction with the urine: 
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore pour your drugs into the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause harm; 
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then raise the wound with water and oil and soap, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is or conducted from the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot issue; 
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the care of what I say thus, that you measure it many times, is one excuse for measurement by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I iron rod according to this form and let it be three angles fixed into one stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stones, so that it cannot come back into the bladder. 
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then put the bit in the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the bit in your hand at the stone poke and poke, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side. 
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If the urine comes then press your hand upon that which is remaining of the stone which is within the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then it is broken and leaps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.  
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread below the stone and the other above, then make the shaft straight against the stone between the two liens, then extract it further, and untie the lien, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound. 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It happens that stones are found in women, and if they ever occur, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three things: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;  
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who reveals her (parts) to others, even when she is chaste.  
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; 
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that perhaps the stone of the woman is deeper than that of the man, for which it needs to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises to this, then you must take a midwife well knowing, and at pains find one, and if you cannot find one, then no matter how subtle a chaste virgin; 
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and presents a well-wived woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands her to do what you command him of the examination of the stone; 
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: 
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it befits him to push her finger or foundation and search for the stone; 
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she forces it under her finger, and he recommends that she put her finger or hand on the patient, and search and press her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it befits her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it is seen appearing, and feel the stone in that part; 
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his loin above the hip or below, and let the waist be first small. 
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then push the loin into the waist, if you feel the hip so close to the wound as long as the hip can issue further, and know that many kinds of hips are: 
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and which have reins.  
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound does not close, put on it ground vitriol, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained; 
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, as long as the hip is further, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the hip for men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the wound is bleeding and it's from an artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and bind it with bandages and don't start again those things, and leave the stone and don't milk it at all, because by chance the patient could die. 
puis cure la plaie.	Then heal the wound.  
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is appeased, and the tissues become hard, then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramice aquouse is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syrup, which is out of the yolks of eggs, that contains the egg. 
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "syrup", and never properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is the other egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin of the region between the white (syfa) which we have said. 
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and those do not happen at all, no.  
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from percussion on the regions, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is declining in yellowness, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more: 
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white syfac as we have said, then it is the abscess reopens, as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the regions, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the proper tissue, then it is the abscess reopening with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white (skin), one feels it well 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe all the intropositor quite well, for its form is before
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what then comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body. 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put beneath him many cloths;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the scrotum; 
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula lead, and cut the skin of the scrotum among them long up to near the groin, and let your incision be completely straight dividing the skin of the scrotum until the white (skin), and scarify subtly according to your power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the sty into the fluid at the wide opening, and extract all the fluid, and then put your dressings, and stand the sty upward. 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the head of the coals, but only the sty;  
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all or in parts evenly the costus from him skillfully, that if you do not cut it well wisely, it will return the fluid. 
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the eye-lid was in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sty;  
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two eyelids of the head of the coals with a suture, then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; 
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the cone to the entire suspensory ligament, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; 
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cut the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a half-soaked rag in rose oil. 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put outside another rag soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two cones, and put cloths doubled above them, and bind it above all the ligament according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and employ them of wool wadding according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and let the restraint be all assembled in the buckle of the arm.  
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And at no time is this branch of cautery medicated in place of iron cutting tool, and it is that you prick the subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the water is uncovered; 
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	So take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac with one incision, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in every way that you can, as long as you are scraping all of it;  
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep that the fire does not touch the sac. 
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is more healed;  
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and moves guarding against the flow of blood, and avoids that the works of cutting. 
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing opposes you, or abscess, or running of blood, or another thing, cure what opposes you, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, administer perforation as I tell you, and when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the water root is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat. 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess in the part below to the whole spatula wide, and put the perforation through the long of the body; 
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out.  
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave for it to run out the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put in a pen or the instrument with which we treat the water of the dropsy, whose form is before. 
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widen the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this root there is fear in many cases, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it. 
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.  
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and even so in the joints; 
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by many causes. 
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excess of acid and hot, which is spread to the joints, or from percussion; 
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And it finds no pain, and is a painful abscess. 
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there are some painful and dangerous abscesses, and of a bad color, and sometimes come from the outside of an artery or from inflammation of a vein.  
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from the outside of an artery, then it is recognized by the position of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not right that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its position at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this appearance and on the other sores.  
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And that you cut the heart of the sores, then it is in front and the tail further down, and deliver the suspensory on all sides of the head.  
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the head is already joined with these sores, then it is necessary that you cut the head and the heart. 
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is near the skin or in those that are within the vessels, then you must deliver all of that tent, and wrap the top roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the bone is or its rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is accomplished, then use the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and in wine, then the cure with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is a boil enveloped in an envelope resembling the bourgeon, with the softening of the edges, and the patient cries out sharply when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is just as dangerous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the edges down to their groin, and cover the entire vessels that are near the penis, and stretch them out.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with a sharp spatula through the vessels in width until they are open, and then scrape from each side, just as we said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle where it has the doubled thread, and ties it to the first place where the vein came, and ties it straight to the other end.  
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted humors; 
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then he heals the wound like the others where one avoids a bowe, so that no vessel leaks that would nourish one of the corners; 
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because by those no evil comes, and if all the vessels come alive, then it is necessary to draw the corners of all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the vessel does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the sciatic nerve
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The happening of this ramic is thus by the section that comes or where it is placed, or the extension above the belly in the part of the bowels, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either due to a blow or to the stretching of it, and these two manners of damage come from many causes: 
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or by jumping, or by falling, or by lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things.  
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension due to a blow are that it happens in small parts, along a long time period, and does not come suddenly; 
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even up to its point, because the blow quickens the intestines.  
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various appearances of abscesses under the skin, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it happens that the intestines are caught with the belt, and held in, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, for which it behoves to avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to pull back the intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can enter it; 
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be sewn up above its neck between your hands, and raise its hips; 
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then is the hair on the above, and cut all of the skin of the scrotum from long.  
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the books of the waist pins according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue out.   
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then skin the soft flesh that is below the skin of the scrotum, until the white flesh be uncovered from all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your two index fingers in that which follows the scrotum, in that which is between the white flesh that is below the skin of the [testicle], and between the second flesh, and depart that which is behind the [testicle], and between the second flesh; 
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move with the right hand inside the hair of the scrotum, and have the white flesh on top to your left hand, and lift the [testicle] to all the flesh toward the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the arm upward, and untie those that are behind the ligament. 
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and seek at his two sides if he has any point of the intestine enveloped or white and hard there, and if you find none of these things, then put it into the belly below. 
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or one that has the thick thread made of many threads, and put it into the rear part of the soft spot, which is after the skin of the buttocks. 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. 
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the soft spot, about which we have said that it is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong bandage of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then envelope the hairs of the threads and bind them together in the form of two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for an abscess. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put directly the linen according to the first linen long II must of that one, and after these II linens leave to the sifac which is below the heart of the loincloth the great one of a doe; 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; 
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part which is below the skin of the loincloth, as long as the sinew, and the bow, as we have said before;  
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the linen that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes is cauterized the white of the eye as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of the flowing of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the linen as long as it dries through it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in drying, so be raised from hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it dries; 
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is joined to the trunk, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cutting above or lightly below. 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut into it, and cure the abscess from those who work on it, until the vessels flow;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the flesh;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and let no parts of the bowels come out towards the genitals, and if any do come out, it is bad, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless if it remains too long at this point, the wound or abscess swells so that the intestine rises. 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is swollen, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen with its parts and opened. 
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the cure for this is by cautery, as we have said before; 
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:  
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the area of the rupture swollen in breadth according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the abscess that is under the skin which you have cut, then take the iron and place it on the appearing area of the abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and he presses at the forepart of the belly, then counts their two appearances of the sciatic upon the head of the thigh, and counts one and the other 
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extracts the head of the thigh, and does not cut of the sciatic nor extend any other thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the hernia of the bowels; 
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then cures it by the cure of wounds.  
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound as long as it is healing.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times is softened the skin of the testicles in some men, because those things that are within are softened, and it is made to be seen;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie upon his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened upon the natural skin; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then assembles the two lips with a stitch, and if you see, first stitch the superfluity of the softened skin to three stitches or four firmly; 
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then  bind between the ribs, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread. 
dou chastrement	through chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that chapterings are common in our law, and for that reason I would like to not speak of them in this book. 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only for two manners:  
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	of which one is that the  mirrors know how to answer when they are asked, and also how to treat them; 
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need cauterization of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	Therefore I say that cauterization is done according to two manners: 
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction, or by cutting.  
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the parts are softened and pliable; 
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then take hold of them with your hand, until they are put back in place and you no longer feel them.  
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the chastisement of the waist: 
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It behooves you to hold the beast, and press the skin of the buttocks with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each side at the hip, when you have well scorched them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and I leave no point of the syfac and the subtle syfac which is on the vessels. 
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one that is done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing of the members remains, so the beast desires lust. 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then care for the wound until it is healed.  
des hermofrodites	Of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as men: 
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one if between the two sexes it appears like the figure of a woman, or there is hair, and sometimes the urine comes out short.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it is on the pointed part also like a rod and they copulate.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care of the man and woman is that you cut the joined parts all off, and treat them like other wounds;  
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A wart is a carbuncle attached to the natural part, until it is too ugly to see.  
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should trim the excess of the wart to your hand or ones you have, and cut it lightly; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and don't pull too much from it, so that bleeding doesn’t come out, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another car that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and the stem, and by chance it happens, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this they called it in ancient times "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the origin, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; 
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natural by birth, or by accident through illness that has come to it; 
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or is caused by  a charmed joint or by subtle or strong sorcery, and is done in the thighs, or ribs, or underarms, or wherever; 
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevents conception, and childbirth, and possibly flowers from blooming;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the knowledge of these things is through the regard of the healer. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stroke is approaching near, if it pleases you to your two or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is from subtle sorcery, and it is close to the two books, hurry then, and do this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and the woman be on her back, legs spread; 
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then form the two books, as long as the subtle sorcery is strong, and until the numbness is over;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and lay the woman flat at home each day so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the suture is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stoppage is of flesh, then suspend it at the end and the top.  
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the blood-thinning medicines, such as Acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of egg yolk.  
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then administer a wide plank splint so that the wound cannot close; 
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And thus it will be for a long time, and administer to him a tent of dry linen.  
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be cured with other dressings until he is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a boil comes in the flesh, it must be treated according to this manner, unless it is an inflamed abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened. 
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division the similarities of those [symptoms], and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the piles, when they are driven into the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless by iron cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then take the hardened part with tongs and cut it at its roots, then powder on blood-restricting medicines such as Acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then put his feet to the air for an hour, then put it in cold water. 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood comes out of the incision, make him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster on his back with it.  
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he withstands it, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that doesn't work, let him place suction cups on the back and breasts without hurting them; 
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it there.  
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess heals, treat its place with ointment until it is healthy; 
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the harsh herb, so it should be covered as I said in the previous section. 
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is healthy. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and stony abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore I say in this treatment the hot abscess that comes on the arm, which is not like abscesses that swell. 
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is hard at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to lance it, but let it mature until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he can recline, and support him on his back and bring his legs together towards the outside of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then follow it towards the right side, and there administer the instrument with which one works the mouth of the marsh, so that afterwards comes the form; 
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see administering this instrument, you first make the rake in order to know the depth of the marsh, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient;  
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not injure him;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and that he holds the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, on the spatula left; 
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moistened pads in rose oil, or in green oil dry; 
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the tent far from the wound to the edge of the flesh, and put outside on the flesh and on the linen blade clean moistened in water or malves are cooked;  
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure after II days of oiling preceding these, until it is healed. 
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And no time lift the flesh and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and arnica long are cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then return to the oiling. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the mire, then it behooves you to guard against cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The profession is first to the midwife that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman pressing down, and desires to smell the air. 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	therefore the child must hurry with force to straighten 
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	therefore know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with it. 
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then it is appropriate to gently press on its belly so that the child issues forth quickly;  
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when it descends onto its head, then comes the second one with it, and is cleansed the womb of its superfluities by good purification; 
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.  
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	Because it comes sometimes on its feet, and comes forth with the body or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, or loin, and is converted by chance onto its neck, and by other bad figures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.  
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and the strength of her is weak, then let them sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her.  
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and rose its nature of oil or fennel be cooked, and then put the bath between her thighs with the little spatula whose form is here: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And split the perineum, and cut to its fingernail as far as the moisture that is inside it comes out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and take the womb of the woman as long as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer a clyster of fennel husk with sesame oil to the woman;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then let her take and sneeze from condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:  
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Then now extract the infant. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are dislocated, it is necessary that you reset them gently, bit by bit. 
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, put the woman on the seat, and raise her feet up high; 
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then unseat the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the unseating;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot go in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the knife which is placed before, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even; 
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grasp its feet and extend them bit by bit.  
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps to the hips, then command to take hold of, and let it sneeze from its condition; 
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it shall jump, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, there he lightly treats.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come as we have, say that you take mustard seed of millet, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in the mortar; 
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the woman's area inside and cover this ointment, then have her sit in a bath of hot water until under the ribs; 
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on the seat, then have her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and gently pull on her belly, for the child will now jump.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, put the bailiff to his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be careful on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and be lying on the bed; 
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And bends his hands back and forth, and then takes the hands over the belly, and he pushes the cushions down, until she is positioned below. 
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, then he takes his feet and moves them forcefully, then he lifts the belly upward, then he pushes with his hands. 
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and he shakes the child back and forth.  
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instructs the woman to tighten herself until the child is delivered. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who comes out with a hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand:  
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and leave. 
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot leave, then have her lie on the bed and forcefully bend her legs; 
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the medication that I have recounted.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a stool, then study bringing back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and nurse the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to refrain from moving as long as the child breathes. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the delivery of the child upon his neck, and let his hands be spread, and his face turned towards the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife grasps her hand, then turns it back and forth, and nurses gently.   
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equal, she places it on the natural muscle tissue of the high and oil it, as we have said, then commands her to move it back and forth. 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to sneeze.  
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner to all the back
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to be this way throughout the whole secondine, she cuts the secondine with her fingernail until the moisture is emptied.  
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child strains on her face and neck, she cuts it from the bud, so that it is not held back, and kills the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child inside, as long as you have put him as it is right, and command the woman that she does not touch herself at all times. 
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore if it is lightly extracted.  
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and never three or four. 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, but it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named at all. 
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they, being multiplied, and are divorced by the force which divides them, which is joined to the bud.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they come out as naturally as a single joint, as we have said.  
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out roughly, so treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly what it does.  
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is worth moving to health. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its wise glory, and it is necessary that the bandage know all this, because perchance similar things happen. 
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it is done according to what is necessary.  
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands;  
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or she has fear of death; 
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs raised; 
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister holds her by the sides, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not moved during the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils with mulch of elder and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mulches; 
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them in the woman's mouth gently, then press where she pushes out the contractions so they are comparable to these, and take heed if the child is appearing that it descends on its head; 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if push the contractions in her eyes or her neck or her mouth or in her palate or under the chin or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the contractions are at the legs, put them where the hip and the middle of the ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the needle in his right hand, and place the bend between the two of the left hand, and push it with all his hand lightly, and put the needle into any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing 
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the needle:  
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert against the other needle, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal; 
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then make them equal by moving from one side and the other, so that it goes in smoothly, and let the needles be toothed to hold better, as this is the form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, anoint the ball with some of his oil in that part, and push it in, and draw the other part;  
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains none of it, put this one-cine or higher place, and do so until it goes out completely. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, it is necessary that you envelop it on the cloak, until it goes out completely. 
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then the cape at the joint of the sole or to the knife, and in this way you must do in the other hand, and as well with the feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's bone is thick and it is obstructed in the exit, or where it has a sharp point assembled, it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two, and making the head and extract the sharpness; 
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you turn it to the instrument that is called "almidach", because the form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way do so if the child has a large natural head; 
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is strained by force, it should be split, until the moisture which is or worse comes out. 
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it in pieces as much as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, the traction is light, and the delivery at the mouth of the womb is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you draw it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand. 
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and rub the belly or breast until the moisture inside comes out. 
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are obstructed and the head remains, put your hand in the mouth of the vagina and pull it until the mouth of the vagina.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts it back in one place or the other, and the bone is healed. 
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the abscess is tightened because of the heat cauterization that has come, it does not need to be worked on, but instead one must administer moist and fatty things. 
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and administer poultices, and sicca in softened and moisturizing water.   
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its ribs, and you can put it straight, administer those things we have said in a living child; 
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do this, then the bone will be healed in pieces, and nothing of the secondary (fragment) shall be left. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer those things we have said in abscesses that come in the mouth;  
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, it is put in restraining water, and other treatments are administered. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time there came an abscess in the swelling, and it inflamed so much that it opened and began to great purulence.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not solder the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a strong plaster on it, and after some days one bone protruded, and after some other days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was much amazed because this one whose belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I washed the wound, and with my hands I moved the bones, until the woman was in a better state; 
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and treated the woman for a long time thus, and so it came to pass that she had a little bit of swelling from there.  
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I haven't recorded this chapter for anything else than because when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.  
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here after comes the form of the pressure, which one has in the books; 
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to II turns as II joints of II limbs. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nonetheless, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the tube be 1/2 inch wide, and the margin of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and among the two limbs be two joints of this same fist, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or an inch more; 
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the mare for opening when one turns the two horns.  
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two joints with two adjustments, as you see, half a palm long, and two widths wide; 
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet dangling and legs open, then put the two adjustments together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; 
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the jaws, as long as the bait does what it wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all surmounted, and multiply their likenesses.  
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is more haste in the work, and higher for men for their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disdain the instrument, so long as it is well prepared for it its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her arm, and then make her sneeze of condition, and restrain your hands to her mouth and nose; 
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps for this, well is.  
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this is not the case, then take an iron pot, and make a perforated cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the jaws, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; 
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a chain or a perforated piece in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and steam it until the vapor comes from within the patient's mouth; 
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second bone leaps violently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, as we command the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in the mucus of a leek, and then put it into the patient's orifice, and  rub it with the second finger; 
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she will have found it, she grasps and extends it little by little straight ahead so that the patient's mouth does not close during the extraction; 
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but then you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; 
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and unties itself. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the nose is blocked, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; 
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, then be careful that you do not use the milk;  
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the nose, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema with ointment tetra-pharmacon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she will endure and put it back, and come forward;  
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nonetheless, when she endures, then a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and the patient becomes pale.   
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore it is necessary fumigation suitable to that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have proven fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument for which one fumigates the woman to restrain the flowers and the womb is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is to see similar to a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders broad over the fire. 
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let be the fumigation over the coals, and the tar until it is roasted, and begin again another.  
de percier lou fondement	to examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle stitches. 
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it befits the midwife to pierce that stitch at its due place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the thread so that she does not touch it. 
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment care until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will set right again, then put in a piece of splint and leave the limb for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this stupefaction comes from a wound or an abscess. 
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is necessary to cover that boil:  
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is cured, as we have said of the plantain cautery. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are knotted, and thicker than those that come from near the foundation of outside, or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or more. 
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture from within brings out white or thin boils, and sometimes these fistulas are opened. 
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by those who feel them or have emission or venting when the patient has a bowel movement and perhaps one bursts out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee.  
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing. 
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And that you put your middle finger or foundation, and put a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has torticollis, put in a tent of fine lead, or horse hair, until you feel the tent or hair on your finger. 
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus nor wind nor worm as we have said:  
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce. 
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.  
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the thread comes up to that place; 
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of pain within, then it is that it is there bowed, and there is no use for medicine or treatment by ointment;  
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish tricks that intervene. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his thighs inclined to his belly;  
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then set a tent of lead, or of plummet if there is torsion, as long as you know where the tent comes from. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the base, then it is fitting that you put your index finger on it, if thus you feel that the tent has pierced. 
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; 
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not travel at all one cannot heal it.  
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said anyway one can well heal none, but this happens little; 
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one makes it, is if one cauterizes the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; 
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And the end brings all heat into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation. 
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred hairs are burned, which resemble the feather of an eye; 
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cure it with moist bandages smeared with butter, as long as those charred hairs are gone, then cure it with an ointment that hardens and heals. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If so, he is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, otherwise cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters and does not reach the bottom which is the foundation, and there is between your bottom and the tent a thick covering of char or sebac, and you see the fistula following this covering of the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then cauterize after, as long as it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered the tent, and will fall. 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then seize those charlatans who seem like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.  
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound pains, and comes between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles two good things: 
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of those attached charlatans, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; 
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cure of tents soaked in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound lies bowed, and if the charlatan is burned in the bowed; 
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound of swollen onions with enduring hard char, and they are dry medicines.  
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, put your finger on it or its base, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between it there is the cloth or the syfac or charlatan, or if he is near to piercing, then there is only a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways: 
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put bandages on it and treat it as before. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't let it become too bad, that you cut the foundation holding it, and come the excretions by its willing sense; 
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;  
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound then that it is cut from its foundation, or by bandage or by another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then clean the festered flesh in the wound, as much as you can; 
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation;  
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And no times are fistulas according to this manner:  
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or against the foundation near the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: 
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts the thread wrong in it, and puts the tent at all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that one pierced, just as you put your finger or foundation; 
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no time, until the threads have gripped those parts that are between two, and hold tight;  
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and sound. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in every way that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to make the lace for covering if they are so embroiled, and then care for it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very often one part and trenches;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other part no, because of which one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here; 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhages are according to II manners: 
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the foundation, as well as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, blood comes out, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation. 
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are outside have little moisture, and in short, they come out with a little bit of clear water or a little blood, and have the color of the body; 
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch so they can lie in rooms, as long as the foundation is sore and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and can hold it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots; 
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the clamp cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them to the drapery or cotton, or a piece of felt. 
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder above any hot powders that are in their place of cautery. 
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed.  
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the base cannot come out, then enema the patient with a harsh and sharp enema to wash what is in the base so that it can come out clearly. 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient endures well, and if the threads are further from the base, then the cure is light.  
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and if you pick them with your finger or pliers and cut them, then cure them as we have said until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.  
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner:  
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so let them be wide; 
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then remove the needle, and do this for all the others, leaving one open to drain the excess blood; 
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on top of the foundation a soft cloth in rose oil or in cerate, and put it on top of the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; 
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave him until they heal, and when they are healed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until he is cured. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Of the drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying of fluids in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not useful.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary that you scrape to the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it become moist;  
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat until it is healed as it should; 
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scabbed over. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until it is healed.  
dou fremit	from trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A forence is a small appearance of fault before the body, and goes much in depth. 
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it also like death from chill, and comes in the whole body, and more to the hands than any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a feather of goose, or a feather of vulture strong, and put that feather on the chill, until the circles paint the chill all around.  
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand on the whole feather until you scrape all around the chill, and put it in depth, and scrape the chill from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do as follows of a hook of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not perceive, for to hold onto the two, and squeeze.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, cauterize the flesh, like it is before in the chapter of cautery. 
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	At times one makes a clyster of silver or archate, or lead melted or maillet;  
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and at times one makes of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.   
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema tube small and great is this above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a separation or the belly is tied, like you see, and the shoulder blade is pierced inside; 
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and has on one of the ribs two pierced, and in the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly where one puts medicines of an animal bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and has between each hole a measure of space, then put in these holes one strong thread of spun wool twisted into X or intertwined, and assemble the belly like it is a kid; 
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, if the ligature is at the instrument in front of a strong thread, then enema. 
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the form of the circle:  
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and ointment the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently.  
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together, until it is all expelled, then withdraws the enema, and raises the patient’s legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to flow out, then hold as much as you can.  
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps all night straight through, it is of greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him with a laxative for a stomach ailment, and the medicine quickly departs, so let it return until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.  
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the clyster subtle with which the skin is strained 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the previous section the cure of wounds;  
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will tell you about the cures of hands and medicines, according to their completion. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from that which they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or spear or dart or arrow, or similar things; 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar members;  
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care it is from blows of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt heavily of an abscess hot: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it immediately heals of the head, even if a little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the contrary side of the injured part; 
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the patient's intake of wine and heavy meats.  
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his meat be lessened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; 
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess comes from it, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in wine poultice; 
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not dryed by the air, powder, which I will say a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has dried, put on some ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then bring them together by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a bit, cut it. 
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw it away, then heal it. 
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without a cautery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread. 
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, then cauterize it.  
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: 
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put in this powder which unites as if the iron had melted it.  
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is: 
pren encens une partie;	Take frankincense one part; 
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;  
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Heat live III parts, and powder finely, and apply to the wound, and restrain it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood; 
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then cover it well, and let it remain unbandaged, if it does not swell; 
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one removes the medicine only when it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with caulks alone, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has broken open the wound, even in this state, do not put this powder on it; 
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested ointment or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals well; 
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.  
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers; 
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes at the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat. 
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation so is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, such as  calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and calcined wash also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch and bind with bandages, then treat until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is raised and full of pus, then pierce or lower them; 
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes out, then sever it, and tie it, and cauterize it if it is necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is kept, because the flesh goes, so sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form. 
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then restrain it well, and leave it for some days, then cure with ointment dressings until it is healed. 
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so desire it;  
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, treat them as much as you can, and what you cannot have, leave it until the wound rotts, and be cleansed and align the opening. 
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, put the powder on it that I said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, so treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or a knife and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there is windiness as the patient complains.  
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any of the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up to keep the blood from flowing too deeply, and returning to the heart, and killing the patient.  
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I put attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day; 
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;  
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there come not any spasm, nor bad shaking of heart nor straining of arm; 
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, then you know that the wound is saved.   
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal it then with bandages and other dressings, as long as it be healed; 
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and opens, then you know that there is a fistula.  
si la cure si com on doit.	then treat it as one must.   
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is of incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as above.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, sew 
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, so close the wound, and bring out the fragments if they are loose; 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot, it will lighten the extractions;  
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound, sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines come out, because of which the intrusion of others; 
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because of which one puts back the intestines in, if not done immediately after.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell at once when they feel the cold, they return more to points, and for this reason the middle wound hurts more, because of this one resets the intestines to their place like the others II. 
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly is in IV manners:  
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the other sutures of other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds; 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has come out, and it is a matter of putting things back, this is by one of the two manners: 
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: 
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in hot water with saffron and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;  
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never make this wine restraining, and it moves only that little to deflate. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with lukewarm water or ale and herbs are cooked, because by this it is aligned the entrance to little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut; 
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first cure is to be made smaller than the incision, that none of it should be cut without great necessity; 
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting: 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it is cut inside in the curve and outside not, and see here the form:  
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails protrude, you put them back in their natural form in their proper place, if you are able, because it is worth moving.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; 
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, put the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention so that the sunken part is higher than the other; 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Small wounds put what you have seen, then hold in your hands the minister pitiful that holds all the rupture in his hand, and assemble the lips; 
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you pierce an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one doe of space, and there put a needle where there is the good strong thread; 
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the sinew the four together.  
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two ends of the wound evenly, and then leave one doe of space, and there put another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then the tie of the thread as you have done with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until the whole wound is restrained. 
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium, between fine and thick, for the fine needles pierce all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: 
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason, they should be medium.  
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And it is not fitting to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the stitching. 
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then trim the tips of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes on the wounds to keep them covered, and let them stay until the wound is stitched. 
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.  
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh together with one needle to which a strong medium thread is attached.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you will have pierced these bones all four together, then reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews drabs. 
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each suture the thickness of a man's finger; 
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This suture seven the man, and I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms wide of intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back his intestines after they had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was healed up to XV days, and I treated him, and he was well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not heal him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicines; 
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put half a pound of cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until he was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways to sew:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner one. 
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the heart of right in a straight line, lay the head above the site where you pushed the needle in, and make it pierce from the other side from the inner to the outer. 
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave one side of the site open, and take it up from the other, until the stitch is complete. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of stitching, that the Galens describes properly, is like when any one assembles the two parts together naturally, and apply one head of the site to the other head, in such a way: 
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stick a needle or head of the mirror close, and make it pierce that point only, and leave the two heads of the site.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inside one, like the two shoulders.  
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make it pierce both from the outer part to the inside one, in two other shoulders of the mirror that are on the other side.  
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common and usual manner of sewing. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is more grievous than the other parts of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: 
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire has moved it, so put back the intestine and the skin; 
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder containing charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is available, as long as the wound heals; 
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and stitch the thread, and be joined the flesh, and the membrane; 
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; 
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it two times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicine in more cases than the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of tempered heat, or rose oil, and put it around the joints, and under the buttocks. 
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or rot in the belly, and this happens many times, then give enemas of black wine, and also if the putrefaction comes up to the intestine. 
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called «jeun» cannot heal when it is ravaged, and this is because of the planting of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back inside as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become worm or black, it is necessary that you tie the place which is black, so that no blood comes out, because there are veins and arteries there. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then take what is between the bones, and put the two heads during from beneath the wound all the way out to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, because I have seen that some man was pierced through the belly by a spear. 
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it passed feces and flatulence. 
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the edges were closed. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would have badly in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and ate and drank. 
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such manner: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take fresh cloths of large tests, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the cloth has covered the opening, place it above the two edges so that it strains its mouth shut; 
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then you cover the head, and it stays so that it cannot be untied, then place the other cloth after in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed; 
et cout la plaie.	And sew the wound.  
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	This chief is done in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such manner: 
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the thread of this intestine that is quite clean, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine with it, and wind it into the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching of fragments is not other than according to the way of hope and promise; 
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the great internal veins, there is nothing but subtlety 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is closed and inward curved.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the truth a knotted and hard and white thing, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird; 
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear and narrow, and other times thick; 
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and other times enough;  
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is nothing other than by one of the IX causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or for his wickedness; 
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because he has hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to be born.  
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or he has too much swelling; 
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the wounds are rotting, and the matter is of bad quality.   
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the cure;  
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and slow for health, and swollen by nature;  
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones. 
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.  
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is therefore necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; 
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, or intestine, or kidney, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet. 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar ones.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance; 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it wishes; 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is crooked, then make a search of a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends itself around the crookedness; 
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it by tents, then have it clstered through one of the openings, because moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it;  
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then carefully with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and are bruised in place, and ask the patient well of the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and where he feels it;  
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then act according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign matter and corrupted flesh that are within; 
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then care for it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from right place, then it is necessary that you cut into it as deep as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal ointment, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is at the bottom; 
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointment for healing fresh flesh, until it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not strike or affect principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then  remove it as much as the corruption is gone, then cure with healing things for flesh until it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and returns bowed as before, know that you have not gone all the way: 
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	then expose and go as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep in part, that you cannot come to it.  
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is nothing else but to leave it to nature; 
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with tweezers, if you extract it with a tool suitable for this, and if there are many bones, you draw them all, do not leave even one. 
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it difficult for you, and there is no error or fear, cut through both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.   
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, place on the wound something preventing rot, and leave until the flesh around the bones is rotten, and then the bones will come out more easily.  
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, you resect only as much of the corruption as the blackness has been removed completely, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of corruption, and it comes to near the bone. 
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	Then it must be scraped and covered all the way to the corruption, and then it must be cured until it is healed. 
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help with your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the materials came to the leg, and became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the physicians, through their folly, opened too much so that the abscess opened, and they corrupted a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that all flowed out and moist from within the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many a man was cared for for two years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I came to be called upon him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what ran out through the wounds;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the youth became red at the joints, and had a citron color.  
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I then hastened, and dug into one of the wounds until I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came as far as the inner bone;  
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed that which appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except that which I removed;  
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal it;   
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and I treated it, and then I set the bone, and I prepared to solder the place.  
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not do more than I joined together around a palm of the bone, and the traitor was pulled to its whole size, then I restored it with medicines. 
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was healed and joined immediately, and it was not necessary to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the blood evacuation often happened, but it was cured entirely, and in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was in good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary at all, neither to going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take linen and tie it to the head of the bone that is open, and command anyone who stretches it upward.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another link of linen bigger than the first one, and tie it on the flesh which is above the bone, and hold the head so that you pull the corrupted flesh down below, and uncover the flesh on the place where you see should be, so that the skin does not bleed from the flesh; 
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a piece of wood or a board below the bone to move and cover the corrupted flesh;  
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it should be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and should be still another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely; 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put the piece of wood below, and then move it from one part to the other the corruption, and be the suture of the long side of the corruption the point, as we have said; 
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and bone where it contains from the other side.  
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to cut; 
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the finger of the foot, it is a very serious thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you. 
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And purify it in every way that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not cause you contrary.  
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the cutting instrument and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument. 
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. 
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider the instrument which you need according to what is appropriate.  
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can dislocate either inward or outward; 
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the dislocation comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or from the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb; 
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness, then that corrosion from limb to limb goes, and takes hold of the whole body. 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hurry to cover it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come until the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes until the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come until the arm. 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes to the arm, then cover it with the knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no worth administering further remedies than the quantity of its virtue. 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And so do all this when the corrosion comes or foot.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes in the first joint, then cover it after the other joint. 
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes to a foot, cover the whole foot.  
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint.  
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die; 
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister on one of the ties below, and others ministers the other tie above, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ties to a spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered; 
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or sew, and put on each side the draping of linen, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess clothes. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the place thoroughly, or you put on some restraining powders. 
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed. 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you that it happened to the man in his foot:  
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackening that resembled fire burns, and this corrosion first came in his instep, until it encompassed the whole foot. 
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed.  
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long afterwards the corrosion returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things  receptive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion. 
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he urged me to cover his hand, and I refused because I had hope of containing the matter.  
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and doubt also if he cuts his hand, that he may not die because the virtue of the man was weak.  
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed. 
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not this recounted outside of that which one does otherwise, if one has need.  
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; 
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and out leaps the pus, and remains in its place as a vessel. 
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin which is above it is as fine as a delicate tapestry, and does not run until to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called 'sound,' and is not called 'fistula'; 
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone making a path, it is called “fistula”; 
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin there is that you cut that skin all around, and also when it is thinned, like a cloth; 
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not let it for its corruption.  
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have faith that the skin will harden, and the corruption is not in its path, and the skin is thick of flesh, then treat it with a clyster like this: 
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breasts are large, and the bosom that is in it is of foul odor, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: 
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take ails, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of those according to your need, and make them sharp and in honey, and in a clyster the breast, and restrain the opening; 
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.  
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breasts are drained and the pain is removed. 
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and at no time is a clyster of water and ashes used when this medicine is present, and that you take ashes from a vine stick, and pour water on top, then let it drain, and in a clyster, until you know that the breasts are well drained. 
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water and ashes, then clyster them with water and honey or where there is a piece of litharge ground; 
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes it dry. 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well purified, then you will make a clyster of those which cause flesh to be born in it, and that you take plaster diaphinit, and do it with rose oil and wine; 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you will make a clyster of certain medicines and ointments, about which I have spoken of the properties or treatment of ointments; 
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter it, then widen it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil oil, as long as it is widened; 
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then you sew it and leave only as much space as the clyster can enter, and if the opening that gives birth to the bowel is above, then cover or lower the level where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the stomach is in full form, there does not let flesh enter. 
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner that the stomach descends to its lowest point because when the stomach is full, there does not let flesh enter and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner: 
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the stomach descends gently downward, and leave nothing of the stomach behind.  
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidated medicines to put upon the groin, and be over the linen cloth that covers the whole groin.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as forces the spot of the groin more wide than the first one, then be ointment under the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the groin to align the stomach, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is through the breast wound, bone often to remove the bowel, and know those that run from the bowel, if it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible; 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take ward if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when your medicine has been in such a manner extended and you see the nature that jumps on the breast wound, so you know that the breasts are already healed, and approaching health;  
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, so change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.  
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed ingestible after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venoms come after a long time, if it does not trouble you of health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is delayed, and those who do the opposite; 
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the indigested bowel jumps from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing; 
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, so apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like diaphinit ointment, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;  
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; 
puis le confit et en use;	Then confit it and use it;  
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And the same way, make honey cooked with rose petals, when diaphinit ointment is not present, or take frankincense, aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then glue it to the cloth, and place it over the breast, and sometimes administer a long stalk of aristolochia, and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour made from chickpeas and wormwood;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in the use of simples or of composites: 
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, and make a powder, and put on top the honey that I said, and use it.  
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is prolonged and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has entered deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs. 
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of a fistula, as we have said before.  
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other places. 
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then an abscess comes, and it corrodes and throws out a boil until it corrodes the root of the nail, and perhaps the whole thing.  
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corrosion to the bone, as much as it comes painful pain, and is the shoulder of two large, and is the color fluxed. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity which is left of the wound, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the joint presses the flesh in and it begins to prick and swell, then it is necessary that you put the cautery under the joint so that it does not prick the flesh, and thrust it upward, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and place on the remaining flesh medicines ardent and corrosive to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it further, because as much as the bone is corrupted it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the two do corrupt, then cut it in one as we have said before, then care for it until it is healed 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first.  
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the joint with a sharp spatula by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come until the flesh which is below the joint, because the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top which soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance there is some where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born in any place of the two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cut of he who is fleshy is light, in this manner: 
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a wide spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure:  
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold him to cut. 
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In someone who is born or must have the afterbirth removed, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The soldering that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by soldering of wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you cut that suture so that it may heal according to its natural forms;  
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together; 
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of thin lead until the ligaments are fused, as it is fitting.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a joint comes together with its palm, so bind it as is fitting.
des vils	of the evils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are thick envelopes full of melancholic superfluities that come into many members of the body; 
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and there are more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It therefore becomes necessary for you to administer to him once purging of colocynth, then a potion from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of iron is according to II manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; 
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other manner is that you raise the vein, and treat it with all force. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this manner:  
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First put the leg in hot water very strongly, until the swelling is diminished, then bind the leg of the patient from above the hip to below the knee; 
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in its place, whether in I or II or III, with a wide incision, then elevate and treat with force drawing out the black blood from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the disease allow.   
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then bind it up, and command him to stay with black-legged meat; 
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full, and harm the patient.   
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevation of the limb follows this manner: 
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell. 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bathing water, heat it over the fire, and then apply the hot water to the vein of the long bone in the thigh or at the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then open the skin with the scalpel, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; 
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then pull the root down until it is elevated from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the scalpel, and then put it in another place above III joints.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it at the base, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first. 
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another opening, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut to the double of the foot, then thread and lift up to the second incision. 
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it piece by piece, until it is completely out, then cut it. 
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot thread and lift it, then put a needle into the entire strong double thread, and tie and thread it, and put it below the base, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot thread or lift it, and it brings much trouble to the patient. 
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it completely, put on the wound a cloth moistened with wine and rose oil; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.  
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the skin is constricted and twisted and covered together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it jaggedly, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which you cut the skin is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut into the vein; 
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where there do not grow herbs nor trees, and in land where it has no moisture; 
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance, it is born in other places than the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes the color, and begins the vein to go forth as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wrap around one piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time that there is pain on the outside, wrap around the plank, and tie it. 
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out.  
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings an abscess and rot there, and a bad illness.  
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, for that reason, it is necessary that it be treated piece by piece until the top, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of length, or of ten, and one man came to me, whose it went out for ten palms long, and when you cut it, it brings out the root or pierced, and pierces it to the bottom, so that all comes out; 
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And be emptied the matter which is within, and administer at the place medicines preventing corruption any day, then the cure as with the abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes in this vein many pains, and even when it opens at the joint of the foot, or of the foot, and there comes much blood, and from which it jumps out;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure therefore as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land “disease of the ox”, because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body rising and falling, and one feels it well at the alert of limb in limb, until they reach the skin where it goes, and jumps out; 
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the rotting of some humors, such as those that come from worms and lice and roundworms in the belly 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its malignancy, because when it goes through the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; 
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.  
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and milked, then it can only be driven away when it goes: 
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut above it and drive it out, and if it goes back into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; 
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and the path be cured. 
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient with purification of body and medicines soluble for the corrupted humors, and beware of rotten meats. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This malady is called in our land 'vakirir', and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I looked after, and I saw it rise also as a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as if live silver when it moves from place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that place, and it goes into the shoulder, and then a little after it spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.  
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she was turning back around her body, as I saw her. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this sickness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted to move the pain from that place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman. 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered, and for this reason appeared that constraint of windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins covered.  
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, so tie above and below gently, and then cut on top until that constraint of windiness has issued forth. 
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;  
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those who expel wind ailments, such as fetid pills and wormwood pills, and similar ones. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth;  
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have parts; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that fall in any member, they fall in two ways;   
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore in any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterward, appears to you: 
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many cases. 
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the skull which is above the brain, is when there is clouding and numbness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps this with pain from the nostrils or ears; 
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps he loses his speech and voice;  
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and also leaps as if burning of flesh; 
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the wound, and treat the arrow if it is not already out.  
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it falls or rests in the body is that it is near the left breastbone, and it feels as if it were lodged in something hard, not hollow. 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: 
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know then without doubt that death is approaching.  
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the common is that without pains of foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the sick turns color, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the ribs, it is near the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing; 
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and moves all the limbs from the shoulders.  
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes or stomach, by adventure there leaps out from the wound some thing of undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls or into the belly, and in no place of bone through the gut, there is no hope for healing, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain. 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.  
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder joint and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and the seeming members, are safe according to more disposals.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason that you do the same thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell into the root of his nose. 
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and it came out on the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling anything.  
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in another case, an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the eyebrow, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, to all the iron light without ears; 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The fellow was healed, and no bad accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was Arabic with ears; 
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the barbs, and I carefully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And treat an arrow to a man, who it was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die.  
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then that he had passed XXX days, so he did not change his condition. 
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and I enclosed it, and I pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.  
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if a man has an arrow that fell in his back, and the wound is closed on top; 
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow stays inside him, and does not change his natural dispositions, nor does he feel any inconvenience in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if another man has an arrow that fell in his face, and the wound is closed; 
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and stays like that without suffering much pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And they pulled out an arrow from the prince's man, who had it lodged in his neck, and was slightly leaning to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was completely hidden. 
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to care after it had fallen three days.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined it thoroughly with a fine touch, and felt nothing of it; 
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and it did not feel any sharpness or pain below its right ear.  
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed above its location a poultice atractive and digestive, because its skin did not swell; 
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the skin around the arrow appeared.  
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the poultice for a few days, and it closed the wound immediately, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day within his nose; 
et il le me dist.	and he told me this.  
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound an acrid corrosive medicine for a few days until it was open, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which was becoming loose at that place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with this medicine sharp, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; 
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And pierced well the ends during IIII months, and then enlarged the wound that I put in forceps, and my pliers on one side and the other, and it cannot come out; 
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I did not cease to subtly tinker and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day forceps well made, according to those whose form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I pulled it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:  
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I therefore restored it, and the wound was soldered, and the patient was healed entirely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on those which I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything. 
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare on very little thing, and on what is present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of strange things that happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows are not from the members where they are fixed further than according to two manners: 
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part; 
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which is further by the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and never further now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go further, let it remain as long as the flesh is porous inward, and let the exit be open;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot issue, let it remain thus for some days, and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and therefore she jumps, and if she does not jump, then it pierces around to the whole forest subtle, until the lews around are enlarged, and then the treat.  
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient:  
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if do not treat it, but leave it as long as it is equal after some days, because if the arrow comes as far as the syfac, then it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed further than in the bone only, and does not come up to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then the engine of the milking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very stuck like this and cannot be pulled out further, then you administer tarriers around, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the place until it is healed. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned in its place in the body and one cannot see it, then one looks for it with all their strength.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, treat it with any suitable instrument; 
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the depth of the wound, and the great depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, then make a cut as long as the wound is large; 
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, then remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it out; 
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful that you do not break the arrow, that you may draw it out more easily.   
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, lay it until the place is softened, then treat it, because extraction hurts.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and put everything as much as you can to draw out the arrow safely, whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; 
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently: 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then, as much as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it leaps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is left in, pull out the whole shaft; 
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer force, then administer the instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push forward, and if the arrow is stuck, put an instrument with a pointed tip into it to ease extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is surrounded, it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls in the chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it up, then cut into it. 
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound, if it is necessary. 
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.   
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:  
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the end of the hair is also like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as it is in form.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers to insert and to know if it is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins that are used for healing there are thirty-one, because of which it has or head sixteen, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	two behind the ears, which are called the two "herbaches"; 
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear 
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates";  
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead 
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the neck 
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugular veins that are in the neck 
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";  
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly draws blood in each arm: 
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the outer side of the arm, and the common people call it "the vein in the arm";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart";  
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilica is found along the right rib, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the furrow, and it is the one from which one draws blood, which opens visibly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the cephalic vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and little finger, and it has two branches;  
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: 
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the pouch on the left rib, and the second is called saphenous which is at the ankle on the right rib;  
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nerves", which is in the ankle of the other side. 
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are III veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The sap of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and headaches;  
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the sap, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; 
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a strip, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their two places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then place them [the sap] on your thumb, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, make it flow; 
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and put it under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand on all the vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well two fingers deep, and make blood flow as much as you see; 
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then bind and restrain it until it is healed; 
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for old migraine, and sore eyes, and habitual ophthalmia, and to sharp pains in the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the draining are as I say: 
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient restrains his neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulses below his back, and then directs the incision; 
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lifts the key above the vein on his right index finger, and puts the lancet below it, and raises the vein upward, and cuts it, just as you have done with the other veins, and make a drawing of blood according to your need; 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then unbind the patient, and put your hand upon the vein for one hour, then put on cotton; 
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then let it form a knot, and leave it until it is healed;  
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of this and their treatment and their extraction, how the book begins. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face ancients, and migraine, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears. 
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fossor," whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point upon the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again open with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it does not behoove that the flames are too thick; 
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the healing should be across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.  
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The incision of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and to the chin, and to the redness, and to the pupil in the eye, and to diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the qualities of their incision are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a bandage, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then make the incision, and let it be the incision through the middle, one part long of the flame one part wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks. 
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a correction of the blood, as much as you need, and then place it on cotton, and tie it well.  
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is good for fevers, and for headaches, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes on the face, even when it is old. 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes the subtle long flame, and places it halfway between the two nostrils, because the vein doesn't open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And don't let it go too deep in there, and make a correction of the blood according to your need, then tie it overnight because it is very quickly restored. 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the II winds helps in the treatment of the ailment, and the beginning of melancholy, and many illnesses, and epilepsy, and corrosion, and herpes, and scabies. 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck under both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on the seat, then cuts open the vein long a little widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary. 
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do the other part in the other vein, then untie the linen, and tighten both veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave him until morning, that the wound be healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the vein of the leaves
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins of the lips above helps in the ulcer in the mouth, and in the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and in toothaches and pain
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the bloodletting are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	so cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also make of the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the cephalic bloodletting, and it is to the stricture of the throat, and to diseases of the eye, and to diseases of the mouth; 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein: 
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then one and the other, and do not pierce too deep into them, for below are the arteries.  
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm which are commonly bled are drained according to two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they prick at the whole flame, morning wide, or olive subtle as you cut sharp, and it is called “ansel”; 
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and the thickness of the veins.   
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame martin is very renowned, and is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary for opening the veins that are swollen plains of gross blood apparent, and which contain gross and turbid blood; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the olive cut:  
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly. 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it befits the physician to treat wisely, and to avoid the artery which is below.  
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a gushing of blood comes, then it befits him to stop it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And he should not at all pierce with the flame, but cut like a knife.   
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it befits you to restrain it, and change to another; 
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you desire any vein of him, or you treat in his place the vein in the arm. 
elle apert manifestement;	It opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cauterize to the flame as we have said.  
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you draw out the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; 
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with chalk, and then tie the arm, and cauterize the vein with a hot flame;  
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid it then. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and put your hand lengthwise on top of it, then remove your hand if the blood is still flowing, which many times happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind his arm, and leave it so, and do not move it to the patient.  
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be wary, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not healed, and it bleeds, and the remedy is not present, then stop the artery if it opens, because the head of it. 
et estainche li sans.	and heal the wound.  
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a rind of fig, and make it smooth, and take one half and bind it well until the next day. 
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the wound heals, that is good.  
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding. 
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the healing is not always achieved in multiple situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.  
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein of the arm in the middle if helped so that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;  
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the healer to place it over the nerve that is below, and if it is not drawn too deep, he finds the nerve, and it swells, and his senses are numbed, and by chance may not heal. 
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve is open many times, and if it does not open in certain men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel the vein with a sharp instrument. 
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And prick the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the cephalic if helped, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes; 
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all the veins, because it does not have an artery or a nerve. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not grieve if it fails the first time, and one begins again. 
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance swells the veins in some men, because one fails the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that bloodletting is administered only for the sake of preserving health, and to prevent future illnesses; 
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and whether the bloodletting is done in one of the three veins that are or cut:  
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic,  faste, and basilica.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must bleed at the beginning of  priests to gain, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must bleed him on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.  
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bloodletting that is administered to the sick has no determined hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times. 
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Let not those over sixty years old bleed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it is done, it behooves them that he cleanse the bowels with a light clyster if they have much stool held back, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines superfluities corrupted harmful to the principal members. 
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	and do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are so, nor dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if it gets worse after colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach upset, and multiplication of womb in woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and all that virtue, or by thing of the arm or from the body; 
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly the humors, if it is thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power; 
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly the blood, and heal you of the vein in the lower part or third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep yourself that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things; 
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be quiet and joyful, and let the vein to be healed be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then restrain the linen above halfway, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the humors; 
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the place with hands, until the veins swell, and they feel them. 
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger from his left hand above that vein below its place a little where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not escape and let the iron pierce it.  
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee as cords when bleeding, and if to such that are full of windiness, so that when one puts upon the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he operates on the vein, it is too tight; therefore it is necessary that the bloodlettings be advised in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it's good
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If it is not so, then begin again a little below that place or where there is swelling, if the place is not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the place is swollen, and the patient fears, let him leave it one or two days, and do not tie up the arm:  
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	For adventure there may come a boil.   
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into a bath, then begin again the cauterization if it pleases him. 
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the opening is small, or the blood comes subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening all the flame directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And do this a little bit below, so that the place becomes swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	Because this happens many times when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place inflamed, do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a little bit of oil, because it closes the body's blood, and is mixed in this place the oil that the eye; 
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; 
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same thing applies and ointment of them, when it is put on the place;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so make it subtle the grease and separate when it is too thick.  
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes an abscess large, which happens many times, even when it is not bled except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, then haste, and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and some hot, and strain one hour; 
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do these things after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days, no blackening or greening, so it does not harm him. 
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on nothing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, mintarstre, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times abscesses and appearance at the vein of the basilica:  
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put therefore your hand on it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore I warn you that you do not put on it anything of what we have said, because by chance in it without the artery; 
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but the one you make a dry plaster to harden the place, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red. 
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it swollen, let it stay until it becomes thinner.  
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is thin and weak, and needs bloodletting, make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide. 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled sparingly and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking. 
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bleeding is safer from a decrease in blood and damage to nerves, and is better than bleeding long or widely.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give them soft bread with pomegranate juice. 
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is feverish, treat it with blood III times or IV. And if it is of cold complexion, give it before the sore a softened bread in syrup of musk, or in syrup of honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pricks at the vein, after the outflow of much blood, then it behooves him to soak a sponge with broth of flesh and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to empty his arm after the first vein, and he has strong flesh, so he heals seven hours after the first vein, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	Because it has much blood within the body that is already feverish, and brings fever;  
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is necessary to bleed a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will flow in portions; 
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then that you cleanse all the conditions of the sore, and place your hand upon its poultice when it is healing, so that death does not come in its place with portions, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent; 
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not proper when you see a separation of the arm, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press upon it forcefully; 
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is curved, extend the arm fully, because this would be bad.  
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it rest until it heals the second time; 
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, until the vein that is frozen has been opened up, and place on top the piece of cloth put in water, and press lightly.  
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not restrain it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity is to draw blood a second time, then in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein emitting from the arm is bled in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing it is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the joint is red; 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then heal it now across, not wide nor long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood cannot flow out, then put the hand back in hot water, and leave it there until you have enough. 
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not bathe the hand in hot water, because one puts it in more in winter than in summer;  
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve in it. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:  
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and plunge it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if one sees it; 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it entirely throughout, it does not grieve anything;  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too far in depth, because the nerves are beneath all bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot issue forth.  
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you will have treated of the blood as much as is necessary, so put on the vein oil and wool to sew firmly, and thus do for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of him in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have said to you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sap of the sophene is good for all ailments that are below the body, such as diseases of the leg, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of his blood are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it burns, and ties above the joint of the foot. 
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins; 
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So blood is taken from the larger vein, or at the ankle, which is better.  
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you bleed on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and bleed across as when cutting;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flame be unyielding. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the vein cannot be released, then put his foot in water, and let it drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the bloodletting is needed for the first time, begin the second one above a finger-width, because the flesh is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot equally.  
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle of pain, and its hurt is worth to the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of his blood are such that the patient enters into a bath and is strained above the ankle four fingers by twisting, because otherwise he does not open the vein. 
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, let the blood flow in all the ways that you can, and by crossing.  
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it, because the veins are dry, and they are very full to hand men. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, let the blood flow from any vein that opens or towards the heel of the foot, and toward the little toe, and ward off the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make as much bloodletting as you see, and then untie the band, and put cotton on it and strain it. 
ele est maintenant sanee.	She is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of leeching
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cups are made of horns, or glass, or wood.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And ventilation is done according to two manners: 
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.  
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation which is without pricking is according to two manners: 
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is done with hot air, or without heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation which is done by pricking and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is all in the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on the two ribs of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction cup below the chin; 
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction cup on the two shoulders;  
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup above the knees; 
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction cups in the two arms; 
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction cups on the two legs;  
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction cups on the two ankles;  
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken them at all, as one does with blood from a vein; 
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, as long as the whole body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness it must be suctioned, or by habit, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are such people who when they need to ventilate have a heavy head; 
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who bring fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness to the eyes; 
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who bring a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who dream, and see by blood, and wounds, and deaths, and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed after three hours of the day, we command to be ventilated.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The vein of the muse helps with the great pain in the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not right that this should be after the evacuation of all the body; 
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in the place of the vein of the cephalic, and it is not right that those who are of cold constitution use it, or who have catarrh, because this does great harm to them;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason it is not appropriate that the elderly use it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down out of fear of obliousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is worth it to the treatment of pain, and incision of the channel of the throat, and all, and to repletion. 
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is necessary to pull it out carefully, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause blockage in the stomach and heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventosations at the second ribs of the neck are worth it for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and to strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the vein of the basilica;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you command the patient to spread his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery and does not come a hemorrhage of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilations of under the chin are good for mouth disease, and for gum rot, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. 
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the place of the healthy lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for the illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The bloodletting of the veins is as good as three veins of the arm because it draws blood from these large veins. 
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the patient not to let them be too deeply cut because the vein is naked of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.  
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The leech which is on the rump is as good as hemorrhoids of the foundation and as diseases below, and it is necessary that the leech be large and of grain so that it has need to well suck. 
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it were subtle, it would break. 
et i fai grans plaies.	And it makes large wounds.  
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The leeches of the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are as good as old pains in the hips, and of the groin, and of the bladder, and soften the tumors.   
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in place of the two shoulders, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring pain in many positions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and then succeed temperately, and place it smoothly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the place red and inflated, and appear the redness of blood. 
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then fire it, and put back the suction cups, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores. 
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to make an incision only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a deep poke.  
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtilize the way of thick blood. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to prick the third time;  
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out blood little by little, then we only prick once.   
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we often begin again; 
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, prick it deeper, and the end of this is that the veins are pierced soundly, and it behooves him who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are closed, that you oil their legs with ointments  of oil aperitif and dissolvent: 
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in the estate of skin, with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of gourd seeds; 
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in the estate of summer, with oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.   
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balm, or of anise, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one to whom one is healing has tender skin and large pores, there it does not behoove to put any oil, but it behoves to wash after the ventosation of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, should rise from it, or from water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities should drink from old wine, or from the water of the cypress, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar. 
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And they should not apply a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours. 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he bathe when he must be cupped, and when he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard those who are being treated with cupping if they are choleric, and if their skin is too red and inflamed; 
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with the leaves, and similar things; 
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and minced pigeons, and roast meat, and moist meats.  
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and minced quince, and minced pears and small onions and pigeons;  
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day that he will be treated, he should drink more than eat. 
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to certain men no times triacle or musket before the ventosation, or after, to comfort the principal limbs; 
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle with the herbs, but it is not proper that those who are hot drink them.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are applied without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the knee, and gout, and on the belly and groin and flanks and hip, because these members do not suffer being hurt on themselves, and it is done only to draw blood from member to member, as we put on the breasts when the milk flows.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and groin to diminish the member. 
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus it is done when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only so much.  
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water to which herbs suitable for this have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered to fire is here:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should have two sides and half a palm in width, and should have a small hole in the middle of the side, as for inserting a needle, and should be made of silver, so that before it is put on the limb it does not burn the patient; 
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle it should have a transverse bar of silver or iron, for placing a burning candle, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the persons who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suckings of children are other than those of old people, and of the thin ones than of the fat ones. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should one thus place this suction cup on the limb: 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Taking the candle of wax or linen, and placing it within the suction cup through the rod which is within the suction cup, so that the clarity be at the bottom of the suction cup that it not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb, and these must be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, then there goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup which is administered in illness of pleurisy, to all acute [illnesses], has no rod nor opening, and is administered only when it is full of water, and is placed upon the limb solely;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suctions are not administered except in members where one cannot place suction cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in their skinless flesh, such as the two or one and others similar.  
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the qualities of the user is that when you find suctions which are in clear sweet waters without  damage, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them one by one in sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; 
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be healthy of vein and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the suctions.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they will be flat, and fall, if it is their place where one can put a suction cup, put it, because this works well after. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then tighten it. 
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if their sores are still healing too much after the flesh of the wounds, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the wound is healed. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the wounds are multiplied, then put crushed vitriol or galena and similar things on top, until they are healed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them stay there until they dry out on the place, it will now stop.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other sores.  
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the blisters do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or put a needle there until the blister rises, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will swell; 
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are bursting, put powder on a bit of aloe and silk ground together, or ash, so now they will heal. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear child, that the fools who look to this chapter and do not see anything in any of the ancient books or letters read;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason is held back knowledge in our land, because I never found any good one; 
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; 
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are made, as I have done in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or child, or old man; 
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the thread is not very tight, or too cold; 
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and wear cold clothes, that is to say, cold clothing, and venison, lamb, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have a doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; 
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to his first condition that he used.  
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great swelling, or that have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and eggs, and kidneys, and entrails, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such a cracking of the bone, it takes more time to heal and the fracture is faster
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that old and decrepit broken bones do not well mend or unite according to their nature for the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of little children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but if there is a cure, reset the broken bone with the greatest care and join the limb together as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not let any point of his work, and for this reason he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to a roll, and others that sharpen like the point of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with a fracture there is a wound, and a fracture to all a little fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to each manner of thing have its engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes in its place; 
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the fracture of the bone by that which the parts are twisted, and open well by outside, and sound at the pressure of the hand; 
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no torsion nor sound at the touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not appropriate for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes in arch, and are the II parts disjointed, it behooves them now to put at point equally, so that abscesses come from it. 
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if boils come to him, let him not touch them at all until they are quieted;  
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set him straight as you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of one who has pieces.  
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then restrain him, as it is fitting hereafter. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone it is broken in two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and at your hand; 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you put back all the additions in their places as best you can, and keep that by your work no harm or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well.  
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it is well aligned, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess hot and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, so instruct the patient well that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and watch well that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain at all. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it behoves to put it in such disposition that it feels no pain; 
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And guard that it is placed straightly, so that twisting does not come when it is restored. 
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: 
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is fitting to envelop them in linen wraps that are soft and fine;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are thick, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is fitting to envelop them in a wide and stiff linen, because the wide linens enclose the entire large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie bandages lightly around it, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all of the linen, then go above the break and tighten less so that the break is slightly further apart.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you grab a large part of its healthy place, then take back the other ligament, and turn it straight again over the broken place. 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first place above; 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligaments compresses of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or swelling, put on top something that soothes the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days; 
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then restrain with your splints, and be of half the width of a good-sized cane skillfully cut, or of wood from which they make cleavers, or of palm ribs, and be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the splint put on a fracture be somewhat larger and wider than the others; 
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as is fitting to the limb of small or large size; 
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then bind on the splints just as you did in the first hour, then tie them above with thread evenly, as in the first hour above the fracture;  
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	tighter is better above, less below; 
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen;  
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is thick, as I wish in works of fools who make their bandages with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have between each splint less than two fingers' width of space.  
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore by the joints of the shoulders after the straining in their healthy places, then put beneath them pads of linen, or wool cloth, so that he does not become bruised.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the bones are broken, I will say its cure here afterward.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not behoove to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is great, it does not behoove to put splints for after 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of abscesses following.   
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: 
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour that is held at the walls of the mill, and you combine it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many ways, and also to women and to small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take three pounds each of abrasives, ladanum, rue, asafetida, and gum arabic, ten ounces each. 
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, five ounces 
alechil VIIII З.;	alechil nine ounces  
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; 
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is hot, he should use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and has helped many men.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is good for sprains: 
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugwort and wormwood, ten ounces each;  
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloes, nine ounces each; 
acaice VI З.;	acacia six ounces 
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	and boil Armenian bole ten ounces, and grind it well, and mix it with water or the white of an egg, and administer it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that occurs, and those who suffer from bone-setting, and fractures: 
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the wound. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removes the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of setting a broken bone:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remaining pus from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of vervain, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of quince, one part each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind it, and confiture with wine, and if the limb is burned, confiture with coriander water, or plain water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of splinting more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of vervain, flax seeds, balm, melilot, and henbane, and violet and chamomile flowers, one part each;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.  
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that on the broken limb one should put a restorative made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to treat an injury that is worth pain: 
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and heads of garlic decapitated, or feathers of the eyes, and wormwood, and seal equally, and grind them, and make a poultice with them and apply it.  
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has their bone moved from its place; 
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	then do not loosen it for many days.  
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest, or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; 
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light cloth, and damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; 
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of the hot abscess.  
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then start the fine bandage again, and a little bit of emplastrum, and do not bind it as tightly as before; 
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be subtle until it is healed.  
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen, I have removed it completely, and you need to apply a poultice and bandage, if it starts again, as you did the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, then do not untie it before after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the alignment of the bone approaches.  
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	therefore restrain it more than before, and make its flesh grow thicker, as I have said before; 
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see it drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there.  
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply therefore hot water to it, whenever you loosen it, and every third day, and moisten it a little. 
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this method therefore nourishment comes to the limb, and it mends quickly those who foolishly perform the opposite, which leave the limb twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and such work is perilous, and I do not see anything else but to let it be and operate it straightly.  
des diverses manieres de brisure	of diverse manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures there are, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined. 
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the bone breaks all the way to the side which is below the bone, just as it is done with an axe or club. 
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haiche".  
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; 
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound of these two fractures great or small.  
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow embedded, or fissure or of collarbone of stone, or of cheek on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound which is rejoined in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound which is made either by striking with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone inwards, and the lesion is like that which make the smith when he strikes on the cauldrons; 
si entre li piere dedens.	If among the stones within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft or damp bones, such as children's bones;  
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like splinters. 
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about them in their place.  
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry at tents, and by the rotten cartilage which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair capillary is known by those who when one has uncovered the bone, and rubbed against it, so the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes is to be red and inflamed, and other similar ones in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no danger of accidents, and you hope for salvation, so begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, so hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day,  so that the tissue under the bone may be corrupted, and come the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the fractured part as follows: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you shave the head of the patient carefully, and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can, and if blood comes out when uncovering the bone, or abscess form, then help with what is necessary, and that you fill the space with soft cloths in rose oil; 
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of bleeding cessation; 
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to cut around the bone to remove it, and it is done in two ways of work:  
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is that you cut with a narrow incision before, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he puts another piece larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various widths, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and be of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, that you do not bleed the head.  
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and stiff, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer incisions with chisels, not by force that it does not penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;  
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have many of them, so that each comes in its place from the species of bone, so that you may have targets for all tests.  
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three ways of targets: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for perceiving around the broken bone is that you place one target on the bone, and turn to your two (sides) as long as you know that the bone is pierced. 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then place the other target elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the sac.  
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is dislodged from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tempered and more subtle than the other incisors; 
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there remain nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly lift the bone with instruments; 
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then cure the wound with tents and dressings as we have said.  
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other manner of working is that which Galen says, which is more dry; 
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it is said to be very powerful, and this is his word.   
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put below the head of this lens-shaped incisor, because this is its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and let the parted be sharp in two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane which is underneath.  
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is caught on the bone, gently pull on it, because pulling it easily does not harm and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to apply that rasping, and remove the flakes with a fine scraper which you must have various quantities, to administer in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If one shaves before with coarse razors, and after with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, you must bring about a cause according to its treatment;  
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that is not fully replied to by anyone who has put their study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you place a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. 
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this more gently than you can, that you don't hurt the wound, then administer above another linen cloth, and don't bind it too tightly except that it holds the wound alone; 
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let him so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lily, and flour of quince, and incense powder, and astrology, and similar things. 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer other medicines moderate without mortification;  
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to gather pus, because when pus gathers on the brain tissue, it decays and brings great harm to the patient; 
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	because when one puts on the above mentioned thing mordanting, it corrodes from above.   
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take therefore, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if pus does not come out forcefully but only from the medicine that has been applied, which has this virtue, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and glue one cloth, and put it on the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure of manners of cures that it is necessary until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the upper bone, or one by itself, are broken because there are two bones. 
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that lower one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless forced to bend or twist, and then it heals. 
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or pointed finger into the bone and put equal to the broken piece in your index finger, and with the thumb from outside, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; 
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain by your work.  
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you must set it equal at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, do this again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then place a poultice on the head with two layers of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part.  
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you put the other (poultice) on the other side, if the fracture is there; 
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the layers be so large that they fill the space of the two.  
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the making with eggshell powder and powdered millet;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the poultice, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage has hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never put goose feathers in their place, and if the cloth is wrapped around it, and it holds the fracture, and it blows for the patient. 
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make how you see. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if a boil comes while you are working on it, put some cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the place of diaquillon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses come there, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, congealed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and bind nothing nor the sides;  
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the bones is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments to that end, then stitch the fissure, and cure it with things like charred flesh and ointment, and bandages, as suitable plasters and ointments for that purpose;  
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the bones, then cure it with bandages, and put some pieces of wool in it, until it is healed.  
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated down, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outwardly so, and not broken in two, except that it buckles inward, if one knows lightly of it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient;   
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jaw, put your right index finger inside and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension of the two parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	and if there is a movement of the teeth or a rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and then place on the broken jaw a cerate, and put on top a double bandage. 
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on top of the bandage a large splint well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above where you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerate.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a light linen plaster, and if the plasters adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is sound 
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it heals in III weeks.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, rewind that no piece of the bone is removed; 
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtle tools are used, suitable for those.  
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so sew up the wound if it is wide, and place upon it plasters suitable to those, in order to prevent suppuration, until it be healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The shoulder breaks many times before, towards the shoulder blade, and the fracture is according to III manners: 
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and dislocated in II, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work if the fracture is without a wound, is that you have II ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken forcele;  
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others extend the neck toward the part; 
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put each broken piece together so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor displacement. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be as large as your necessity. 
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and gently raise the strength, and strain the ball with your hand so that you put each broken piece together as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus with force because it comes in contact, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his arm and put under the shoulder the pillow medium, and throw the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the humerus be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then bring the broken pieces together, and if you find them broken, then it is fitting that you cut further;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and try to bring the pieces together gently, and if the bone cannot join for any movement, then cut with one of the incisions you have made; 
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you place under the forceps this instrument, to guard the shaft
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it convenes, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work. 
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, like is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones. 
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt hot abscess, so apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes to it, then soak the cloth in rose oil and wine, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of ground meal and yolk of egg, and put light dressings over, and put a sphere under the saddle, if you have need. 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide band, one palm's width, then put it doubled over the poultice, and fasten it. 
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender strip, three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down.  
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the injured shoulder;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the head does not move above the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligament loosens, then restrain it; 
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small cushion under his buttocks, to raise the shoulder higher. 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	So it will lighten the fracture of the shoulder blade by aligning the shoulder. You should bind his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then begin the splint again if you see that he needs it, and restrain it and leave him so until it is restored. 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for no man.  
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens that the shoulder breaks or gets wide open in the middle, and it is known only by touch.  
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if you set the bone according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.  
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on top of the place powdered flour with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on top a double cloth. 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on top a wide and subtle board, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the edge of the board is chafing in any place of the shoulder, then use that hair (or fiber) for bandages of linen so that the board sits evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then restrain it with a whole great band firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the linen every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it loosens, restrain it, and put the bone back in its place if it is out of position, and lay the patient on their side.  
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five. 
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is accomplished, untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that moves easily out of place. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, do it as above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the thigh to appease an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone sometimes breaks in the middle, but it happens rarely.  
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down to the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alacrity, and thirst, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the seams in the broken bone, and he feels all bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and you put one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the two ribcages with your hands, and subtly try to set it in every way that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on plasters and poultices above the subtle salt cloth, or another light cloth, and wrap it in a bandage, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move. 
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the limb around to the back, and restrain it tightly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it softens, tighten it. 
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, remove the plaster, and address what has come there with ways of treatment; 
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reapply the bandage, and restrain it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick part after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are brittle;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels it well at the examination as two. 
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is declining inwards, the patient feels great pain and a sharp sensation, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and besides pain, and coughs and vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a grievous ailment, and the ancients have put great effort into it.  
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, in order to expel the wind outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not perform this, except abscesses are present if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come to him, heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said any of you should apply cupping to the area, to suck out the pus and this seems reasonable; 
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping draws away superfluous substances from the area because of weakness.  
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of us should cover the place with soft wool in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the wound even, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt about the patient, it is necessary to cut above the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under the instrument in order to guard the wound;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And therefore one must dig the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a boil comes, put it on cloths moistened in rose oil, and put it on the spot; 
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the place of that which is fitting for the boil, and lie still on his side or where it should be, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and sometimes it happens that he bends;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if he will be healed or not, if you take notice if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many positions, and if they move and feel well when they are restrained and pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one puts care to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take notice if his feet are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and involuntary excretion; 
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one is healing it upon his belly, there jumps forth an evacuation without volition.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is set on its back and he wants to sit, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal: 
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if one does not labor well in its care.  
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, so place upon the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is appeased; 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put upon one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a linen bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.  
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes disjointed, then it is necessary to cover upon the heart; 
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment that incites flesh, until it is healed; 
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", put your pouch in your left hand, and make it even with the other hand as you can, then put the splint and support on top, if you need it; 
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then restrain it, and if there are bones displaced, set them in place, and treat the wound until it is healed.  
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there may be only a little bit of lessening at the head;  
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and then it lengthens and leans towards the outside, and comes to the patient pain in that place, and prickling, and swelling where it breaks. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which are the fracture and the form of them; 
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is in the head alone, then set the fracture even, as long as it is in natural form. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it bends inwards, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of cork, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; 
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the weight under the ribs, as long as the ligament is even.  
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes there, then do not touch it, as long as the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the manner. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistant is what is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two ways: 
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a thick rod of wood, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two heads with two bindings, and bend them upward, and set the patient on the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then lay the broken arm on the rod, until it reaches the armpit, and has in its middle a curve of wood, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers stretch it downward; 
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the two ends of the fracture together with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.  
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his bed, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands his ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below to all the limb, and extends each one to his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, restrain the linen below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one binding below the armpit, and the other toward the elbow, below the fracture; 
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And also if the fracture is towards the outside, it is necessary to put the splint lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on the surface and on the outside. 
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture as it should be, and restrain it, if a boil does not come there.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if a boil comes there, do not restrain it until the seventh day, and put on moistened linen in oil of roses, until the boil is appeased.  
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and on the arm so that the arm is in a straight line, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.   
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one finger's width of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side; 
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then bind upon the splints, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, tighter and less spreading outward. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the placement of the splints, and the binding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it bound up until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at the joint every three days, that it does not itch or swell, or that the nurse can come to the limb for this reason because it is too sore. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none of those accidents come, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach. 
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or is softened the ligatures.  
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If you address him by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is first finely ground.  
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when he begins to recover, it should be coarse. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days from all;  
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must unbind it and administer baths and medicaments of ointments for the place to be healed. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and entangled, it remains to untie for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fossils," because one is small, and that is the one that follows the armpit;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little toe; 
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.  
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.  
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large ones are broken, so is the healing bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended, and set straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's the large bone, then it should be restrained more strongly. 
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And place it on the cushion and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor. 
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the ministers (ministers) of his arm to the underside of his hand, or to the linen, and some other ministers to the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if any are severed that grip the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it up with bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; 
si pren la cure.	If you take care of it.  
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration boils appear, then glue a patch of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft. 
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and cover the patch gently, until the boils are appeased.  
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cerote, and put the ointment of ground flour with abundance of egg on it, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the splint be more to the outside, and a little wider than the others.  
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that it must have six bandages or arms in more ways. 
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And bind more above the fracture than elsewhere, and all days less away from it, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. 
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.  
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, with which it is stitched, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.  
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb in hot water until the itch is appeased. 
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be too tightly bandaged resting.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loose and the bones out of place, and similar things, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And take care if the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too far away, then you must soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the nourishment comes back, and then restrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unbind him until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if he does so then let him place his hands to his neck, and let his arms be level, and beware of movement and fidgeting, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this wound is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the constitutions and the complexities of the virtues.  
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on our wrists many fractures occur, and there comes nothing but swelling many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient lie crossed, and be straight in front of him equally. 
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then put his hand on the board stretched out, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equally the eyes, until they are well joined.  
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And put the plaster and the bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place.  
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And be enveloped in a linen cloth. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the end of the hand toward the belly, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then the constraint of a long cloth, and let the star of the heart be as large as the palm of the hand, and the constraint, as it is necessary. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and make the bandage tight between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of our two sides, if it is the pouches, set it equal, as it is necessary. 
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and restrain with the palm, and if you see to put a small straight star to raise the fracture, and do not move it. 
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is to the other two, as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie it with the healthy joint which is after. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all in I holding, that much worth, or you put on a star, as in the pouch;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take ward in the restoration and in the arrangement of hot abscesses, and cure those that come, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward. 
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration if is done by tying one above the fracture, and the other below.  
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his tie evenly; 
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is joined of the bone.  
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, so one of the ligaments toward the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the tie be below the knee, and let the extension be downward; 
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the mirages bone evenly with his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.  
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it be appeased then return to your work and your cure; 
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The ligament is made in such a manner.  
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you encircle the fracture with a rigid bandage doubled in II or III, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread upward. 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn upwards on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put above the fracture splints, and put a splint above the bone of the leg; 
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to bind in the form III twists or IV above the fracture; 
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go higher above the fracture, and less restrain it; 
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then feel for the two bones of the thigh that you have put between the leg and the hip, and in part III are the small bones above, then go back down to the bottom of the thread, until you reach near the foot.  
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and restrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that there comes no abscess or swelling nor any other sign. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens there, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times. 
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it is necessary to remove them, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place and drain pus.  
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip is broken like this, when it is set, like in the shoulder or arm. 
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, with restoration done like this, it does not help the patient. 
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And knows that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the path of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer just a fissure, or perforation, and it happens to every wound, and without wound, and this one feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done by putting equal those things that are rounded to their sides, as long as they can be assembled and moved together. 
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then put the splint on it and put a round piece of wood inside if you need it, and restrain it as is fitting, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like a hot poultice and something similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put to each accident what is fitting for it, until it is healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "the fibula," and the other is called "the tibia." 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And there happens every breakage as it comes to the arm, and for that reason, the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all here. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.  
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen well; 
et torne desoz.	and it turns downwards.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore administer extension, and put it straight, and tie the splints equally; 
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; 
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the splint according to its virtue.  
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have accomplished your work entirely, take two strips of  wooded splint that support the leg on one side and the other, and be the length of the leg from the knee down below; 
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and with this bandage, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good. 
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer anything to the long bone of the leg, and if it is broken, put on the leg in order to ward off movement, and this is properly done in the fracture or where there is a wound. 
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; 
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it cures as long as it is healthy.  
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come at any time fractures and to two points, and there have been further than in more postures.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at the two shoulder blades, then restrain it to the foot carefully, then that you have wrapped with cloths around, and other things which you need. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when III days or IIII will have passed, then untie the linen, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the two broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand;  
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and be one point more wide, then put under the foot that board that I have said, and restrain it carefully; 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the board under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it stand on the top of the board further out under the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.  
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have said them. 
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it is fitting.  
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the break of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, set it standing wide open, then incline it to the back part, and have it held by the back; 
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the hollow of the woman's body with cotton, and put in as much as I stand for; 
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then lift the woman up, and raise her back gently, gently, and then push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the body, and return the bone with the stand;  
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or around: 
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	then the fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a sheep bladder, and tie a string to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature;  
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string end, until the bladder is inflated inside: 
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will return the fracture;  
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the finger of a man or a woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; 
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures near are not hidden from him who sets his study and practice to it, and understands my book.  
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies to more than one disposition the right way of restoration: 
enten le donques.	Therefore, then.  
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the thigh; 
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloths around it, and leave it there for three days or until it is healed, and it will be healed without haste. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds that we have said testify to them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, keep the vitriol there, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the broken bone that same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come there, let the restoration remain until the ninth day, so long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it neither on the third nor on the fourth day, for you would make it come bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it behooves you to set it gently with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not ready for you to put it even with your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this purpose you must make sure that it is impregnated with three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of fracture; 
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and about an inch thick, so that it does not bend at the compression on the limb during your work, and be blunt in front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And is called "palangin," for which the head of the bone should be placed on top of the apparent bone.  
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And bring it together at once, until it returns, and are equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it behooves you to chop the head of the bone, until the instruments have purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for this, or scalpel or saw, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then raise what is remaining in the bone of sharpness and small splinters. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	So do until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black wine stich and properly if this is in situation;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound, other than to which there is oil, lest it cause decay and corruption. 
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself good guard that the wound is not strained with the fracture. 
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have these things happened to the foolish people, and they have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time;  
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the constriction be softer and more gentle than other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may occur there, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it does not behoove to put upon stars.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, in place of stars, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, remove what you have placed on top of all the wine, and put ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmasion and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone comes down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for many days it passes and it cannot be mended back in place, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must close the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death may come from it, but let it be until it will heal itself;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps after twenty days or thirty it will fall by itself, then you can cure the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, leave it so. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of burns that come from the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We come often after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the limb; 
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance, he cannot do the natural works of his limbs.  
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take guard therefore if it seems to us fresh: 
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he administers medications astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acai, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and you confit them with astringent wine or with yolk of egg or with honey; 
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not separate it in hands for days; 
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then unwrap it, and begin another one, as long as the swellings are removed;  
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you restrain upon a piece of plank well made; 
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the properties of the plank are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then make a cut above, and bring the superfluity to appear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you apply it to a certain razor, until it is removed, and the wound heals. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterward the limbs weak and thin, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one reason being because it was bound too tight, and not bound as it should be; 
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bandages, and the blood supply could not come to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or by a multitude of blows; 
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or by too great movements, not at its proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him. 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths to him, and give him joy and ease; 
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put the poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the rose often with warm water, until the swelling corrects to the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape. 
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After health, the crooked limb
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; 
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death. 
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the knots and the tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of balm, and roots, and melilot, and similar things. 
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and take the mucilage of balm, and confit it with fat of goose or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top. 
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.  
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the torments are old and hardened, like stones, and there is a need to remove them with iron, then it is necessary to cut to the bone, with a subtle incisor lightly.  
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put cushions and study in the cure. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is an issue from any joint of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly formed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary now to bring back without tarrying.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and by chance if one sets it back with force; 
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for this it is not necessary to move it when it is inflamed 
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brings pain and other aches;  
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then let him be, as long as the abscesses are calmed; 
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as they come back to their place.  
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to II manners: 
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are a little out of place, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chin, and close the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by many disarrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it carefully, and do not hesitate at all. 
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his fist into the pocket from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; 
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be outside, to make them equal.  
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And command the patient that he soften his mandibles and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the member is placed evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is brought back with a grip, even if it is the two mandibles together, then apply hot water and oil, until they are gently reset. 
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not hesitate about resetting, as we have said.  
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, then place a moistened cloth on a felt made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bands. 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders be standing between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or to the left, nor does he make any effort to speak, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed. 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not make any effort to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.  
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and familiar fevers come, and perhaps a bowel rupture, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a peril.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times die those who have it, in nine days. 
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The wrench cannot dislocate from within the ribcage, continuing into the flank, and it is dislocated no times outwardly, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then presses the place with the palm of your hand, and it will return. 
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place on the splint and the bandage, and restrain.  
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder which is towards the side cannot dislocate. 
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does, and if it dislocates again at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place on the splint and the bandage, and restrain it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; 
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same way, bring back the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways: 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	of which one is that it dislocates towards the hip.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is towards the chest; 
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance, it dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.  
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves.  
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And many times it dislocates downwards towards the seat, even to those who have little flesh, because at them it is felt harder; 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	To those who have enough flesh, it jumps with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.   
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflates the shoulder with a hot abscess, and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore it behoves that you prove it, as long as you are certain of it; 
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the cure.  
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known the dislocation when it is pulled downwards towards the seat, and puts a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; 
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and below the seat touching the top of the shoulder, as if they were one piece;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor move it in any way; 
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you can clearly feel it by touch; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is healthy.  
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their hands under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; 
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it downwards; 
si venra hastanment.	so they come together gently.  
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come together as we have said in hand shortly after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And the minister soothing and comforting ointment, as decoction of altea and fennel and melilot in water, and be administered. 
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then be the patient laid on his back, and put under his buttock a piece of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then place his heel on the cloth, and lift the shoulder's head gently, and draw the hand of the ill. 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move down;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder returns now all, and if you see so reset it according to this manner: 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make be present a man who is greater than the sick.  
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight toward the ribs, and push the shoulder below the seat of the sick, and lift the seat up, so that the sick person hangs in the air; 
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers pull the hand of the sick downward toward the belly.  
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may put with him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And reset it also in another manner: 
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and is on puts a long stick in the earth, whose head be as also as the post, and be neither too thick nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then let the patient lie down, but that he have coverings on top of him, and the patient be standing by the long staff. 
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let his hand be stretched out to one side forming, and the joint will return to its place readily;  
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a piece of wood from the arm of great size and four inches wide, which has the head rounded to enter through the bottom of the sleeve, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie on top of the staff coverings so that the staff does not bruise the patient, then place it under the sleeve of the patient;  
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And extend his arm on top of the long staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm at the end of the hand, then place the arm on the edge of a plank of large size, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang down from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns now. 
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behooves you to put under the shoulder cap a ball of wool even, then put the plaster sprinkled with powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder evenly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he exercise little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal more quickly; 
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then he should exercise more after seven days or so, and move it;  
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is hardened and not softened, it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is displaced from its place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then you must administer cautery to it in three places, as it is shown in the chapter of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.  
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breast, or back, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there are administered other places;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care until it is sound. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing pain comes to the limb, and gradually in movement, so the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is soothed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated often and frequently returns.  
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated from all sides, both front and rear, and the dislocation is not well set, because one sees it well and feels it well; 
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each figure.  
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the blade with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it as the abscess comes, because if the abscess comes, it would be harmful to reset it;  
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the rear; 
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.   
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to both hands; 
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms be spread out, and the hands do touch according to the knife around, in front and behind, and push the joint to its chest together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and grasps the root of the palm with his knife that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; 
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tight so that it does not move during the extension; 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, then that you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the fingers have joined the joint to its hand, then the oil of any oil for softening the joint, then push the joint firmly together, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with a drop of egg white, and hold it firmly together, and lean the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it for some days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligament, and leave it.  
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not well set, start again with the splint and the ligament, and leave it for some days, until it is firmly set. 
puis le deslie.	Then untie it.  
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press it until it is soothed. 
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put on the joint a wool fleece, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and make him enter a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put on the fleece again, and then into the bath. 
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus do it two or three times until it is healed.  
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see it, put on top fine cloth moistened with hot butter, and keep it pressed. 
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its place. 
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easier than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place carefully, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limbs do not swell, or that an abscess comes hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the ministers the hand, and carefully place it equal, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns. 
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the diseased one's back of his hand on a table at extension and return. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, the patient puts the back of his hand on the table, and the helper puts his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is well. 
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain with soothing plasters the abscess, and leave it so without recommencing.  
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, then the joint remains crooked. 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does not harm the patient except that as long as his hand is weak, and cannot pull anything at all. 
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;  
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other thing to do except to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then hold it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and let it be as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, apply the hot water cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the bones of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly;  
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	therefore are the bones, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the bone, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; 
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for a day, and then put it straight again that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bandage it, as we have said, and unbind it every day, and make it move, and then re-bandage it. 
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and also do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do so, when it is dislocated from another place. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs of this are that the members jump away without will, cannot hold them, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one. 
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times it moves the shoulder in four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves at the back is called "gilbosite": 
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure of this is that you reward oneself if the "gilbosite" comes from childhood:  
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those which come from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said there were ways of treatment with great words, where there is little profit in all. 
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.  
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling which comes to the breast before, nothing heals. 
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly in the two sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say. 
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient be stretched on his face in the equal place, and have a strain below him, that he does not move. 
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then insert the tinder at the head into the earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen around below the buttocks of the patient, and the other to the hips, and knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and the minister knows the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones.  
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the bone as we have said, and the minister puts his palms upon the spine, forming a shape, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the shoulder, and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the shoulder, then put the middle of the board upon the spine;  
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and let the minister place his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see, do so with the turnip that turns in the hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you put two bones at the head of the patient with one arm long, and towards the feet, other two, and have between each bone, above and below, a palm's width of length;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each stick a hole, or the turning goes, and be the sticks firmly in earth, so that they do not move. 
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two sticks have one turning stick, so that the line turns, and have in each turning two small sticks of a palm long, to turn the turning. 
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the line which is among the axles to the turning towards the head, and the other line towards the feet to the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning on the whole line, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.  
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the splints, and then the strip of a tablet of three fingers long, which covers the place of the vertebra and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a line as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed; 
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the method that we have said before.  
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes it is administered a piece of sponge, and sometimes it appears in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation. 
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, therefore one must not have presumption there.  
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for adventure would bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and do not come out like other joints. 
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parts:  
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inside then, and poco dislocated in front and back. 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens wider the knee of the injured than the healthy one, and the injured person cannot double their knee. 
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the limb that is below swollen with abscess heat, because of the coming of the hip joint. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to the fever, so is this accident contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has this in front, it is that they are well their leg according to completion; 
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, they do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot before, and retains their urine, and swells the groin, and when they go, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it in back, is that he cannot extend his knee nor double, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The return of this kind of dislocation is that you notice if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And he should not have presumption there. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of IV manners of dislocation, so hasten that you return the joint, and the extension within and without, and the movement to the right and left; 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	For perchance it will return, and there is no need for other cure.  
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare the minister strongly, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or on the linen that is tied above the knee; 
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other ministers extend their hand above in such a manner that they push their hands under their shoulders, then the tighten with a linen band above the hips;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another grip the head of the linen. 
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upward and downward all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.  
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not done, it is necessary to take care of its appearance. 
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is at the edge, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy rib, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the linen upward toward the groin, and towards the strong muscle. 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased hip, and extend it outward.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	Then it will return to its place now; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.  
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen cloth above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other; 
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and be above the ground two arms long;  
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the minister to embrace the head of the groin, and let another minister be hanging with the sick person, who embraces the groin firmly, for the joint now returns quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the back, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has gimpiness, and restrain the linen on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also; 
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two sticks, one at the top and the other at the feet, then stick a stick between the hips of the sick person in the middle;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And have the patient wrapped in damp cloths so that he does not feel cold, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand into the dislocation.  
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it is not, place on, that is, a table, and press as we have said in the chapter of the boil, and the patient lies on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said; 
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the surgeon's palm above the sick angle, then press with the other hand, and pull it down towards the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the sick one down, nor raise it up on the ground, but rather that it should be as if the hip had been dislocated backwards, as we have said about lying on the two hips; 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And be upon its face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table. 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be pointed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even.  
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the hips, and put the splint, and the band of bandage so that the hip does not move. 
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rest three days or four, then untie it, and put the splint on top.  
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, so bandage, as before, and leave it three days. 
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.  
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways: 
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards. 
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate again 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if he does not hold it at his hip, know that it is dislocated; 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet; 
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his leg at his hip lightly; 
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest at the hip, and keep them together tightly for three days or four, then untie it; 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tender before the part where it is dislocated: 
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The resetting is light, and one should extend it gently with his hands when it is only softened.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, then you should make the patient sit straight, and hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle; 
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the foot in your right hand, and then in the left twice, then push it upward, and gently push the foot upward;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; 
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that is well;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, begin the work again, for it will return. 
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return like this, so do to guide the patient onto their back on the ground, and stick a pail firmly in the ground between their hips, and tie blankets around, that it does not cold the patient. 
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then grasp the ministers the hip, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or to the linen, that it ties above the neck of the foot. 
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the pail should be placed between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when it is extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the ministers equally the dislocation in their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return gradually.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, so put the plaster and bandages on top, and hold firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the linen is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds soften, then strain it. 
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days.  
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come there, then it is fitting that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, then you should make the patient sit on a level surface or on a table perfectly straight, and place your foot upon what is apart from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is aligned and there is nothing apart from it, then place beneath the sole of the foot a board two fingers wide, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it. 
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest, until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:  
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	So be not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold; 
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning soothing things to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb now, so that the hot abscess may come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound as befits it, with dry dressings;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if it is accompanied by a fracture, and fractured bones are dislocated, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases. 
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you harm according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. 
