O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and have made an end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange to all, so the science is lost and cut off, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this came the error and the vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who engages in this [medicine], climb up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of the moving and resting veins, and their place of emergence.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this, Hippocrates says that with the name it is much, and with the work it is little; and also in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with the things previously said, should guard himself so that he does not fall into error and harms people; just as I have seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and sense of experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who opened, that is to say, an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut open the arteries of the neck; for this reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; so he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called for the treatment, and I see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I see another surgeon who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance forced the break onto the wound as stars by very tight ligature, and did not leave any ointment on the wound at all, and left it like that; and he commanded him that he not loosen it at all; and he remained so long that the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it it was in peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the member was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see i. another wound which broke open an abscess and then inflamed by the wickedness of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For which it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish ones cannot speak ill of you. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galens says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish seer." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicine cauteries, and the chapter orders from the head to the feet; and the forms of the instruments, and the preparations for cauterization, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter orders the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the help and of the nuisance of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and nuisance are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret answers; and these speak more sages, and agree to these; and I am satisfied with their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally to every constitution where it has matter, except for two constitutions: namely, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry constitution combined with matter, some said that cautery is great help; and the others said the contrary: that cautery is not worth for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured by heat from a hot illness, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery helps much in a hot and dry illness that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it at no time by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, do not interfere except he who has experienced it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member which is burned, and does not harm another member if it can be named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from limb to limb spreading, and bring to the limb diseases of grievous healing; and by chance kills the patient The fire for his height and for the goodness of his substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I keep from you the secret which is contained within fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made and the incisions are performed.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, because the nuisances occurring are subdued with the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot await the time when greater malice comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; for the illness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is better than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a thing is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where it has few superfluities and moisture, as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand for what reason cauteries is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine for this reason that when we administer manners of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well seen that cauteries is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burns of the cautery do not make rot, but it is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools too quickly; and if one heats it too much; as one does in the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use cauteries of iron which we have found to be more useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, for that way the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and also for multitude of dreams, tooth pain, throat pain, and also all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar maladies.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine, modifying the head 3 or 4 times, according to what their virtues and age and custom can bear; then make a small incision on the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds then cauterize with the cautery called "olivare," for this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make a downward and outward movement of your hand, twisting; then lift your hand gently, and look at the spot if you see the bone one little bit; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take one point of silk, and put inside soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and let him leave it for three days; after put a moist cloth in butter; and let it stay until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say that ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they helped with moving it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say any of these that one must leave the cautery so that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one must leave the cautery so long, and press so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors go out; and it is necessary to leave the wound open long; after that, one should cure and suture.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is fear; and I think that one should leave them; for the bone is weakened by the continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more safe and more moved for me, and from this I work in such a way as to achieve salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the whole head comes chronic pain, and lasting long, so must the patient use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie,' and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take ward if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize him beneath that cautery a pock as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery upon each horn of the head unto the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called 'vasselz'; and there is one there in which on puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it behoves that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicines boiling, and we have done the other cures that I said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers wide, and then put the head where the pain holds in such manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed so, tie it and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat fiercely the slice of garlic, and leave the wound thus 2 days or 3; then put on cotton plunged in butter as long as it covers it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see so do any of these burning medicines that I have written or do in the tenth treatise of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with this form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or a bell with one pock of curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and stir the fire gently for a little while, until half of the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton in awe of seil, and place it on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened with butter, and then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire point, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and reign so on the place where it hurts a line of half two of long, and remove your hand once, and restrain that you do not touch the artery and that you do not come until the bone; and guard the mandible that it does not move when one sets it, and the nerve does not feel but the numbness and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against spillage of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened it with medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called "poin", for this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the sick ear, or at the two places where the pain holds in both, and you have distanced a bit above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn; and make ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Burns that must be cured by cautery are not except for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make a cautery on the resemblances that come from dryness and nerve sprain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of burn that moves from phlegm of the eyes and discharges of the head and gargles, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let him make cautery around the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put in front, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little bigger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vessels» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large herbs and pills that stimulate the brain; afterwards, raise the head of the patient all up, and place on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written about or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if I make it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy like this, it is good; and if he is not, to him make .iii. cautery of the  emission of his head down to the neck, and there be distance between each cautery .i. two of gross; and cure it like the others, and if you see it join, and the patient suffers, to him make .i. cautery in the middle; and if need is, .ii. other ones upon the .ij. horns, and cure it until it be healthy; and let the cauteries that are called «olivare», as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and of what we have said before; after wash the head of the patient, then make cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and .iij. on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is far, to him make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart be burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it be healthy, and let the cauteries that are called «olivare» as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargarisms and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after having tied up their head in the middle, and there I place 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the superfluities or the humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cauterize of such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After re-dress the head of the sick person; after make 1 cake of linen well made, as well as 1 circle, so put it in between the head; and the sick person sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and is worth mixed with the butter of goat ancient; and the heat at a fire moderately, so that the two should be able to endure it; after empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good governance, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it cauterize by making more points on all the cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts on cotton moistened in butter and fat of goose.  
de l’awe des eulz	from the awing of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to raise his head back, and make cauteries in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to both eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with a long cautery according to the width of the temple; and ward off the bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, staunch it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and to the incision the caution how you will stop it; and at times one does cautery or hot iron below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Of the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: one cautery under the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot iron below the two bones; and if there is need for more, one cauterizes it sagely above the eyebrow with a little cautery each.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the course of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nights of broth; after the king (the head), and make the cautery or middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sides, one a little below the temples; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olivare". 
de coi ci est li forme:	of this is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of the hand except while the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It happens sometimes that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: namely, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your care; after, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if it were the leaf of myrtle, and let its commencement be below the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and musk of Persian on the eye, then heat the cautery which is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little and little many times, so that the hairs be burned in the place; and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are stiff, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of fiery medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in 1 eye only, so must one work on 1, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg white; and the head of the patient be in your good keeping and put your hand showing upon the medicine, and press 1 peck and the loaf every time that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this lengthily, so remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is passed, raise the level of awe, and return if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.  
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is not so, put back medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set; then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning heat cools, after cure the place of the ointment which is called "diphenais" and another, until it is healed.  
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you be careful in your work with great care that it does not fall from the eyes to the eyes. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that part which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:  
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let it not be returned the right way to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on him according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on your hand; and hold the head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after put cotton moistened in egg white or in juice of pearlescent on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and it is shaped to the head as the shape of a goose feather, together the way the cautery should be; if you see, so it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is shaped is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and treat the rottenness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and treat outwards the bowe; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the grease of the eye, and the corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not work, reapply the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; afterwards put moist cotton in butter on it, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put corrosive medicine on top until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to fistula, and cut it open; afterwards place in the fissure a subtle camphor of this kind is the form:  
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it is made to the quantity of one-third of a plum; and hold your hand or cloth firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted lead does not flow into their eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye moist cotton in butter or honey: the lead will close the opening of the fistula, and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not so, it is necessary to administer purulent matter to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.  
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there happen cracks in the lips that are called "hairs," and even on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these cracks of what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply i. small surgical cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he places it carefully into those crevices until it comes to the point; after curing the place with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: therefore, it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or pierce of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron brand comes to the point of it, and where the last place; and do this once or two times, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if this is not so, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is not worthwhile, then put the head of the sick person in your health; afterwards heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the hot cautery as much as possible, and hold so long as the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterward release your hand and re-start the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it remain for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupting dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not worth it, then there is need of cautery according to .ij. manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of wax, and the end in a spoon of iron or lead; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton are moistened in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on .i. hot iron until the fire comes to the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery assembled with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or steel, and be thick so that the flame does not reach the mouth of the sick person; after heating the cautery, for which its form will come here afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next.   
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the moment of this cautery, and then pull it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery where you will, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the cautery:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated cautery as comes hereafter with the form, and let it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and place the hot cautery upon the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cauterize according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put on moistened cotton in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place with ointments and tents until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures prevail on the channels of the pharynx, and even when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by dissolving medicines; after that do cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not come near the throat, and do not burn more than a point. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and be the cauteries which is called "clavicle" from this we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy. 
de la toust	of the boil
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the pore are cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor drought, and the illness is ancient, if you make two cautery on the forcele in their veins; and one other cautery between the two nipples; and let the cautery that is called 'clavile' according to the form which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cautery in pricking to all the cautery which is called "points" of why its form is before in the sickness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at three reins according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for those are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three in a copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards support the patient on his back and on his ribs; after, lift the heart which is inside the small space with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then sharpen the cautery which has two points as it is shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates to the ribs, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries; and for this reason is made cautery with the cautery which has three points, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted on this nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place on the cautery parsley bruised with seal; after make rest the patient, and do not move his limbs by long time until he is well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens little, then make cautery on the thick of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in pricking.  
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.  
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it is weakened to its complexion, and there are multiplied the catarhs in him, and in the customary ways of cures it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be cured on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this afterward I make III cauteries 1 below the collarbone of the hip for the quantity of one penny, at all the clavical cautery, and II cauteries fires the II ribs as long as the figure of the cauteries is to III angles, and have such spacing between one and another that they are not joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they reach the II parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and seizing upon the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see of inche; then cauterize to the whole cautery which is called «poins». 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is moved from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those that we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then it is necessary that the patient be soothed on his bed; and sign of enche III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the rib of the man comes; and there is space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be long from the body, and do not press too hard with your whole hand on the cautery; and be burned only half of the heart, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you desire it, cauterize these cauteries with the knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care that you do not burn all of the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and that it does not come to boiling, for the heart is very subtle there, and you know how to see.  
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the substance of the liver or in the capsule; if it is in the substance, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the capsule, he feels pain fiercely. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure fails to work, it is necessary that the patient be tended to on his head; and then place a poultice on the site where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to the sun's rays, for this is its form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery as long as the hairs are burned, and come to syphac, as long as the pore is all firm; after the cure according to the cure of the wounds until it is healed; and it does not behoove any others than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured at some time. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly operate, and it always seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.  
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and also thick and as long as your fingers; and the moisten it in oil, and the press it at the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauteries a point downward in the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining back a point; and one cautery in the hip, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs near the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand too much, but make it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said any old man that any man uses fire cautery resembling the razor, and heat it up and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and jump out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.  
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse of those we have said in the divisions of the treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which the one manner is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back; and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is at the mouse, or the ribs of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation with which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two nerves inflamed until the kernels are pierced from the other side, and then withdraws the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, so cauterize all the cautery to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for long time, and this is worth moves that other cures before mentioned. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for edema, except when it is done in the manner called "asclytes." 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make for him IV cauteries around the neck, and I on the stomach, and one on the liver, and I on the mouse, and II behind the back on the spine, and I in the place of the breast; and let the cauteries be well close to the edge of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open for to get rot long time, and not leave any care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the .ij. intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the anvil that we have before shows; and for the back is olive, according to what it is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic and are full of awe citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep into it, thus tighten outside the yellow skin, and let the cautery be according to this form:  
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries to grow long without curing, that they may be in it; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle to each cautery clavile subtle, and two cauteries on the loins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the base, or one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit well, if make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below almedated poc and poc in triangulating, and I cautery below the bud II two; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell up, then to the face one makes a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice at all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care the place until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut thelul, sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that thelul cut; and leave it as long as your hand allows so the cauteries reach the birth of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments beneficial until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we shall recount in its place, there comes such a sickness that can be cured only by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes a fistula and is filled with putrid matter and corrupt moisture, so the doe [one] must prove a fine tent at once and keep that you know at once the tent how much it has of length. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thing is entered, and reheat the cautery as long as the flesh and corrupted parts are burned, once, or II or III, according to the quantity of its need; and guard against burning the nerve that are nearby, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those incisions except in their fleshy place, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is healthy, and if the places are sailified, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the place is healed entirely; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troez, and corrupted the bone at the root; and so like one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes as rains, and of great windiness, and does not take to a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the cautery clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our finger; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be clavicle according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the marshes
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for them to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it behooves one to make .iij. cauteries around the groin, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and .ij. cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the lower back, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with .i. cautery seeming like a circle, and make the mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as the one used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, make .iii. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of these things that we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to say together medicines hot, and cautery of fire. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize upon the bone of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and wide, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive. Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle upon the head of the hip, for which reason there are four according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner it is done in sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and the cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a bit; and whether the cautery is cuticular or whether it is burned with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "point". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery with the cutting or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so much that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do no greater nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach solution by which he died.  
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, for that is the manner, make it like iron and be at the head as large as a thumb nut, or a little less, and be between intersections and be from one intersection to another by space the quantity of a knuckle's joint; and let the intersections be on two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be the iron hip well made; and this is the form:  
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and feel it hot, and then put it on the bone of the hip diseased, and be turned on his healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and leave it 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered long times; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its harm, and rarely do we see those who use it; and nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burning is that you make the instrument in a manner descending along the edge of the gate, and be it of iron or steel, to a long appearance, and in height have two, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a penny; and be open outside and above, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the bolster of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand very upon the bolster of the hip; after put between the two circles of the hot iron that be heated at the fire I poc, and let him one hour of the time, and suffer the patient the heat and burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is found mordication as well as of fire; and when the mordication is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of awe softly, and leave thus III days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scald is gone; and let it be III days so that putrefaction may draw in; and this would be the last help after the cure of ointments as long as it is sound. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, then you make the instrument that holds it as per what you have done in the hip augmentation; and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated it in the rectification of medicine.  
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where it has the small opening of fire so that the point of a razor can enter there; and put one side on the other well packed with lead, and put above alkali and heat and sweet oil, until there is as much of them as you will have well rubbed in your hand; and let it remain like this until it descends oil and pus or even lead, then take all that oil, and throw it on heat and alkali as before.  
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very much used and administered in works of medicine and cauteries of other members Because she does a great job like fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip as well as honey and nutmeg and calx with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Gauls tell us of a cure of a man who was cured from pain in the hip and sciatica vein, and it went very well, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed in one time when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught after.  
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you take of the litargire green fresh and dry, and grind it well with a bit of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the place; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he makes it enter into a bath as long as the body of it be a little bit aroused, and he makes it enter into its bed, and the pain will go away all of it and will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless after the evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with iron filings, it helps a great deal; and it must be done with such manner of cauterization.  
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the pit which is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called fossicle. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat's hair and putting it in fire until it is charcoal, put it on the wool, and let it stay until it is stained. And do this again, and do not cease doing this until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain ceases. This manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat." 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be cleared of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with a stylus, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see it, make three or four cauteries at the clavivial cautery medium according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, burn it with the cautery of this according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery burns every part of the spine equally. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, so cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three, and let the points be near each other. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not apply cautery in a joint which is in the span of nerve. 
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints comes from humors that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call “gout” properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you seize upon the face of the foot, then to it do cauterize with all the cautery which one calls ‘point’. 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then on each knee make cautery III cauteries or IIII of each part, with all olive cautery; and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand forcefully except as long as the tip of the heart is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, so make points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain in the sides, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and give medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good government for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in the groin and the testicles descend toward the hips, it is newly done, so when you see it being cured, that he does not move this day; and that he use things which support his belly so that the cord descends from its belly; after making him sit on his back between your hands, and commanding him to hold his arm as long as the testicles are repaired, and move them to your knees, and place a cautery below the rupture upon the bone of the hip, and all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is white and feels his senses. 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the ministers hold his hand above so that they do not return back; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put under him a cushion and the sergeant upon the thighs, and the other upon the hip which holds his hands; then put the cautery upon the sign of all your hand, and hold it straight and as far as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and by this the patient does not die, or other harm. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.  
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauteries of children should be subtle according to the measure of them, and of large people as large according to their measure; after III days cure their place with cautery butter until the burn is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lie the patient XL days on his back until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boils do not come out when he wants to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he will want to rise, administer a good support to him, and keep it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and guards himself from too much repletion of drink and eating, and from too high braising; and when he does this teaching so is he completely healed.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the treatment of a cut in this chapter.  
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When boils come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then to the boil you apply the cautery according to its quantity, and whether it is one-third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first sign the place of the joint and make a line through the width above the break, and another below, and hold your hand across the entire fire cautery clavicle.  
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and milder. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cautery, that is well; if not, begin another cautery on that one, for it is customary that it should change in the member to which it is close, therefore it behooves you to make the cauteries until the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	of  dislocation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see the cautery, take care that the patient is at the beginning, and if she is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread over the whole sick person, then make V cauteries on the head: I place it nine, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the haiterel; and let your hand go so that the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the escorces come out so that the vapors of the large humors can issue from it; and cauterize the mouse according to what it is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meshery is spread everywhere; and it shows clearly, it behoves you to cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and 1 cautery on top of its veins, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the hip and 1 other below, and 2 on the 2 shoulders; and 2 on the knees, and 2 on the tendons of the chest, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard the nerves that are on top of the last calf, so that you do not burn them; and once it is done cauterize on the bone of the armpit, and 1 other on the bone of the stomach, and 1 other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when more cautery is done, the more it does help, and it profits him; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as healthy people feel it, because the body is already completely corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing its place with flour of wheatmeal with honey and other treatments until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any limb and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cautery on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at times one does cautery with the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus so is the swelling removed; and nonetheless no one should intervene unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the sickness called 'albaras' is enfeebling, and the tools of medicine are of no use, then cauterize with a cautery a point in full depth, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the discoloration is removed, and its color has changed; then cure with flour of rice and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the spot until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a sore by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.  
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless the wise men said that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the sore; and nevertheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in much of cauteries.  
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a malady that is called “adubelati”, and it takes long to die or because of the superfluity that it produces or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after let it be thus. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it burn with the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the sickness which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels it burn in such a manner that the course of rot be alleviated. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called “corrodens,” and it is nothing else than a rotting of the limb, for it drives the limbs as if they were dried tendons. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then sharpen the small and large cauteries, according to what is necessary for the place where the illness is; after that cauterize all parts as much as you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for III days, and put on the cauterized places softened with oil until the fire's scabs are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of flesh-generating ointments. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after III days that the healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if those do not, re-begin the cautery upon those which remain corrupted from their places. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this malady has been cured sometimes with aqua vitae instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of aqua vitae in the division: take it when you need it.  
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the thorns that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that by fire a disease is born in the foot which is called "clots" according to our understanding, and is a great thing to be feared which blurs the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to II manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and water cautery hot. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron cautery as it is a feather of a vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can bend the nail from all parts, and that it have subtle margins; after put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the root of the nail; and leave it thus III days until it begins to give rot; then I make a plaster of wild mallows bruised with wool, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment preventing flesh until it is healthy. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or steel, or a needle of wool, and put on the nail and the other end, that is to say for nails warts; and put the cane so that it wraps around all, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep to the root; and let the patient a little the burning of the hot water an hour; then leave him like this, and it will be uprooted all its roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have reached all those which are on the body, then cure the openings that generate flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or fever or other, it is necessary that you make to him four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if he will leave trembling, and hasten the health from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	Of pustules painful
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time appear by fires the body bathed, or piercing pustules, that come from large corrupted matters. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stem, so that the point is taken in fire, or of long aristolochia root, or to the lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterize is done at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them forward, but are cut off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.  
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grave thing to extend.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Yet nevertheless when this happens to anyone, haste to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are all red; then take one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the bleeding is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do these one after the other until the wound is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another evil does not come upon the sick person; and know that when a vein runs out of an artery, it cannot be well stretched even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and be tied and strained properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring the tightening of ligatures tightly or to put things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit in any way.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, then one must put their thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the thumb, but apply the moist cloth frequently that be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and tightened; and make them with the same those who need cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of tail
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the illnesses for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I have placed this chapter from head to toe, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find more easily what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason more great caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.  
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures.  
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such who have become so with their sickness that they die easily for the foolishness that they find of their illness, and of the greatness of their malice; and of these one should have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their senses, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is spiteful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It does not befit you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain, and whom you can have praise; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the chief until the feet, for those that you may find more easily those that you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes many times to children after birth, and when the birth is too strong pulls the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and to all that I have seen it has hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and he believed so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut a wide fissure in the middle of the head; and be as long as two thumbs, as long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is larger, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it behooves you to cut in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract the moisture all outside.  
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After you have restrained the incisions of cloth and powders, and put wine and oil there, and let it so until the fifth day; then unbind it, and cure the wound by tents and ointments, and let the chief bandage remain in place, and then feed the patient dry meat without moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healed.  
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess, and its assembly of liquid; because sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of liquid, and open it according to what you are able; and guard that you do not sever the artery; and vein blood flowing so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a sickness that is called “catarrh” in the eyes or in the chest, and the sickness is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last cure is this cautery with which one covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It therefore befits you, when you see them covered, that the patient bends their head back; after which rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's collar to the cloth; then look where the vein lies and the places on either side are behind the ears, and so they are restored; then mark the places of the incisions, then cut both sides with a sharp spatula from part to part, as long as the incision reaches the bone, and that it be by the wide part of the head.  
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also like two thumbs across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it sends blood upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of III fingers, then reign in and make until the bone; and those that it is necessary to put blood out is VI c/, and by chance a point more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of syphac, then cope that abscesses don't come, then strain the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.  
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and the old soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient does back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is easily found outside than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is found, then restrain his neck the patient of some drapes, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then skin the leather lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it upwards with pincers, and depart well of the webs that are below each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the awl, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two joints. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not leap without pain at all. 
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw blood of the 6 ounces, up to 3; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in 2 lengths with a strong double thread of silk so that corruption does not come before the healing of the wound, and there comes excessive bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the 2 ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize it with the cuticular cautery until the bones are reached as long as the fingers are cut; and this is the best work if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to finish the humors: for this reason it is of greater help against humors.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts tents on them well made; and when they are removed, there be careful with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a cord of the artery as much as you work on it, so hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place with vitriol and constrain it with your hand that the blood stops; and if you do not have these present, put on the place your finger until the blood is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and be restrained as it is proper; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching of two parts, but the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thick, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives one should of width, and then when you have singed in the two ends, and you put the red hot iron until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and be kept apart between the two shoulders because it is not welded with this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the forehead above the head of fury, and it does not profit medicine to be applied, and you see the face of the patient turning, and feels in the forehead a trembling as if of fever; and where oil is held and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are dried up, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and is that you do at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs that he have or front, then make III cuts or front equally according to the length of the front; and let one of the cuts be as II should all remove the front downhill down until the nape, and the other II as II ribs above the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries which are as II ribs above the papers; and move your hand from the continuation of the II jaws, and let each wound the quantity of III does across joints; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of drapes his for wiping the blood, then put the spatula acute of II parts of this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	of the incision which is from behind the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the two incisions to all the skin that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula fully.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if it is put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire," and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the rib groove towards the bone, and the point as long as it comes to the middle furrow. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens the heart, and then another part make in the middle fissure until the other end; and then extract blood evenly, and express the place for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths moistened in wine and oil and asile, and guard that no abscess comes there; and at the third day untie the thread, and there administer great planty of lukewarm water, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures which one cures wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes watery and small, and the vision weakened, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where they are parted a sharp pain occurs, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the cure that there is, such is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to pull back his forehead, then make a large incision between the eyebrows, and another along the ridge above the eye socket. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it begins with the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the meal; and when the bone is discovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then carefully between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton, and linen bandages; then tie above cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until cartilage begins to form, then cure it with drying things, that make cartilage grow.   
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of flower of wheat and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to prevent cartilage growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which goes into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or something similar as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then set the ear in the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and let him sneeze with a condition, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and raise the ear upwards.  
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times comes force by this cure; and if it does not come force, to him is administered the extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form. 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a subtle oncine of small doubleure; and if it does not come out by that, make a snare of wire and insert the head of the snare or opening into the ear forcefully, and plug what is around the snare with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter there with the snare; then pull the thing out forcefully, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take some gut which they use to catch birds, and put on a small instrument which is suitable for doing this, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the gut upon the stone or whatever thing it is, and pull out forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not emerge from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to cut the ear as an abscess comes forth, and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient healthy in the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be as a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, then administer i. spatula thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer incision to that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with subtle pincers and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water therefore that falls into the ear it is necessary for the patient to use externally of condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie on that same ear where the water is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it has been cured by this, it is good.  
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not work this way, take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in fire; and put one in the patient’s ear, and let it rise up from his foot on the other side, and hold another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make this of stones until the water is completely out, and so it will all be gone; and if you see that it does not work, take a straw, and put one end in the ear, and the other end in the fire until the top of the straw burns; then redo another part with other straws until the water is all out, as we have said about the stone.  
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body which one can feel, then administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there appears no worms, then you treat them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the canine of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.  
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck them out all the way around; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to issue, so stuff the cotton in the ear as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, so administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treating of distillations; and if distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which is the form as you see:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or copper, narrow below to one small holes, and above open for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of copper well made for that, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the tip conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines in the chain, and the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or finished at the end of the ear; and feel the patient inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated at the fire then when it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by wound closure, or by flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes in the ear if one cannot see it; and sometimes it happens that there is i.e., a little piece of fur in the ear, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That one which comes in inside if one cannot see it, is of great healing in more dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all these spatumile from which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be aged and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear opening is pierced with a tool, take a fine and light razor and heat it on fire, then place it in the ear canal.  
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opening where the patient feels pain upon hearing it, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the breadth of the hole, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on ground vitriol; and if you see swollen the ear, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the sheet of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This treatment that comes on sheets of paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry, so it is necessary to spread them with forceps and tweezers, and scrape off a spatula from their roots; then put on top of them ground vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without it there is no decor, then cauterize it with a subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterization after the incision will be cured; and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the groin
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers come to the eyes things that seem gravel in its form and in its hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstorm", and it is a gathering of moisture large in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hailstone moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the hole wide, then peel each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and the cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without feeling a little of the paper, do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the flesh restores it soon and hinders char. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper, and being the hail to tweezers, and cut and press from one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not grieve anything; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which injures flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is created in the webs of the papers above, and this happens more to children than adults, and grieves them greatly at their eyes, and they get the cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces down, and sleep on top, and are their papers under their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place to your thumbs and feel the exhumer between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your thigh; and then take one drape of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach of each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula sharp a fissure of the wide, and be not more great than the wound one makes at the vein; and make the leather in depth as much as you come to the exirnach; and in many dispositions comes exirnach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then with one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand right and left as much as it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not bleach it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, then carefully widen the split until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in warm and cold water, and place on top, and bandage firmly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind herbs and put them on to corrupt the moisture that is lingering. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure as long as he is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, so its care is with plasters soothing until it is healed. 
des poilz des papieres	hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born arranged other than the natural ones, and they are aged, they harm the eyes and bring many kinds of diseases like tears accustomed and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is cause of destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery together fire, or by medicine ague according to that it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and suture or by canes, according to that I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It behooves you to put the head of the patient on your own, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then there is brought a needle to .i. thread above; and let this be below the edge of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and carry .i. thread upward to all the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs arranged, at all the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then rule on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it behooves that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs it, one should cut a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper is soft; then make along the whole spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the top with a large tear down to small; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the ointment into one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it all off; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle on all the fine wool thread, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the hairs on the two eyebrows with nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, take no care of it, then leave the stitch and the threads up to three days or four; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and this work without fear; and if in another way: and that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have shown, to three incisions detached according to the form which is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which ascends with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you don't have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing isn't equal, take a needle where it has the thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put the other thread along the big tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin on what you have marked, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it befits that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the canes is according to this form: and that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make 2 canes by art, and 2 subtle liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two heads of 2 parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the 2 canes of the 2 parts formed; and let it stay like this for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and carry, as long as it dries by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, if the cut has some force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn shut, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the II canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:  
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you prick a fine needle, and put through it one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk neatly, and tie the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head on your healthy; and be so that the work is clear because it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle into all the chase at the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out from all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair sets in its place and the flesh grows on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of the natural hooves, and raise it with that one or where you leave it, as long as it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this sickness which is called "alacratitis" or the rot comes in the eye, if there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden force of wound or incision or cautery, and similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work on it is that you split that joint, and loosen its lips, and put inside tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not proper that you use in the cure of it things that dry and constrict. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but there is work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rosehip or elm and flaxseed be cooked, and the diachylon ointment melted in any oil, and wrap a tent, and cure with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form it was before; and these operations that we have said are only addresses for this illness so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness that is dislocat is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you prick an awl, which has double thread, and place it in the skin, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the threads come into the two shoulders of the skin; then the skin is above the entire awl, and the cut comes with a spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should, it is good; if not, then take a razor and place it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two slits where it costs inside the paper; and let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has the name "I griesche"; then remove the flesh according to the quantity that its cost is raised below, from what follows the paper, then adjust the two severed parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then care for it as we have said with softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the malady comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then place between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip anything of all their power how they make it return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary of work and instruments in more dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper carefully
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering happens to the hand of a man in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the extent as the pinches, until you cut what is adhered to the spatula subtle, which is not too sharp nor too trenchant, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp or they would pierce the eye; and be your incision, by which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it heals all that assembly, and sometimes in the eye salt water, and the rise of fresh water, and of collyrium; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an abundance of egg; and after the third day use the collyrium and the things again as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in two manners: one is like .ij. hard, and one other which is not nervous, but is like white frozen moisture, and when you touch it with iron and you cauterize it with pincers, it cannot be moved; and one and the other semblance begins toward the large tear duct, and crosses poc and poc until it covers the entire view and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the angle with small pliers, and the essence above; then take a needle, and put on it .i. hair of horse, or cowhide, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a poc and insert it into the angle, and pierce it through the entire needle, and tie the angle with a thread and lift it above, and strip all the hair along the side of the angle which follows the root and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear duct with all the small spatula and as little force as possible, and leave the natural char or tear duct, so that through the incision the body of tears does not come customarily; and at any time extend the angle solely on the needle, and thread, as we have said; then strip it all over the small spatula from this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of wool crushed, and with the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as much as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not yet nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the awl cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail upwards subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason is quickened, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of litharge and red ointment and crushed wool, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, as long as it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess, then cauterize it and cure the abscess first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the incision and cut a part and not half so that no tear fluid comes; then instill into the eye a red colic which is made of lead white.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red flesh, and covers the eyelid and restrained upon the papers and turns to the fire, and seems like a rose from a balcony; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your healthy, then the works the eyes, and coil all that flesh as needles suitable to them, and sustains it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the razor until the end, and take care that you do not injure the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatula as we have said in the incision of the angle and small forces of which one removes the white, as the form after this chapter shows; and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silk ground or you distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the fire cotton with an egg white, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the without wool covers you, and you doubt a hot abscess, so leave the eye and cure the abscess with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make as long as flesh is adjusted in the eye by this semblance.  
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless it behooves you to apply the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red that are covered over the eye, and they take away from their sight and weaken the eye every day. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary for the first that you look at if the eye, whether it is whole, or not, and there is no other disease except for the eyeball; therefore, the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your chest, then suspend those veins all the way up according to his wisdom, and let the bandages be subtle double according to this form. 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two lines be by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut other than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have power to collect all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning hot according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of what here is the form; and it is called "sharp head," and it is made of iron for one head reont, and it is pointed like a file as much as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so much as you know that that corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the opening is soldered, and flesh is born, and the bow of the body is soldered, and it remains like this for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not suppurating, know that it is healed; if no, there is nothing else but to bring back the fistula to its opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at 3 angles, and the shaft be tapered until the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye's point, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then return the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens its parts, then the matter goes to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.  
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open entirely throughout, and there is no discharge to the knee, nor diminution, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then cleanse, then put him on suction cups or a heater without hurting so that it sucks; then place on the eye one sheet made of cotton wool and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one by four, and then place one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strain it from above with a hard bandage form, and recommence the suction cups so that they suck without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the sheets soften, then it is necessary that you strain it very much; then remove the sheet after the day and the night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then recommence the plastering and the cloths and the sheet and the suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of the dislocation of cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and it comes forth full of papers like grains of resin, and it is expectable to see; therefore if you want to cover it, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is a double thread from the lamier part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put the other half-eyed oil in abundance of yolk; and let it stay until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape on each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes then give great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and bring down the eyes, and put them in immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye socket
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing else but a bulge that is assembled in the eye, appearing like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the bulge come up to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and let be discomposed the light, and let the patient see things as he would; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bulge is not arranged as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and scrape over the cornea with the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and crown, until it is issued; and when it is out, drop into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and honey, then cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the arrows of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the resemblances of the swords in the division, and those that it befits to perceive; so in working according to health.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the sun, and tie his good eye and hold it firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a hair in the whiteness of the eye at the part of the lesser tear, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" virtuously, and restore your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the liquid is, then express it down one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water descends now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the water rises back up the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is ens fixed and it does not rise, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back into water a poc of silk gemma, and leave from this the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by way of cover an oiled felt or softened linen, in rose oil and a little white of egg, and tie with the sound eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top like a commin with abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it behooves that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit," for this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not go too far in byforce, but make it subtle, then put almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient the sleeper coming, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and take light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you apply this, for those who ascend quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, that you unlock the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who appease the abscess; and when it is calmed, then unbind the view and put on its face the orilliet to cover any day, and be thus in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he goes out of the house here and there, and converts himself in his case; and knows that none of disciples must interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond paste pierced, so that one sucks the liquid, but all the same I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almond, because those who do not know them see them; and be of rain properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone upon the birth
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At no time are born or found joined together chars diverse, of which there are some that seem scorpions at the foot of the legs; and if there are such ones where it has char inflamed with dark color, and if there is char flesh of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chariots which is inflamed and not yet split, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils and place the oncine to those chariots, and the trais outwards; then cut what you can sustain with the sharp subtle spatula from one side, until you know that this chariot is completely removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any thing remains which one cannot cover, then open it completely i.e. with instruments subtle light; so that nothing remains; and if without tear or abscess, cauterize it as is proper; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize them until the blood be extinguished and all the pus is removed, then pour on vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut: therefore it is necessary that you put I linen thread a little thick, and be knotted by the hands of us, and have between each knot a space of I must or less; and put the patient's shoulder of the thread in his nose to its power, and pull until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; and many times do children like this at school, and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel them one after the other in being as we who are or thread.  
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as much as you know that the new ones have corrupted that flesh, then treat the wound, wipe the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back into place as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the wound a poultice of lead for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, for which one distills the oils and medicines onto the wound:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or iron, resembling a lamp open, as a band, and conduct it thus also; and if you see, then make a closed band, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone upon the birth
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born at the bone of birth called "telul," and it grows and becomes great after, until it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and push out all the bone, then put upon its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, one should beware if it is hard, of bad color, of poor feeling: one should not touch it with iron for it is an incured abscess, for when one cuts it any time, there comes great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of bad color, and you see that one can cut all of it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry things and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the bone is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these workbook cartilages, it profits little, for in some men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips together with a suture, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core as long as they heal, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder over powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of ointment of strong or another mending ointment, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then treat it with oil until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To men's mouths there come within the lips abscesses hard, seeming to grains of seeds, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each one, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then put in the place after the incision of vitriol ground, until the blood be stanched; and then the leave of ease, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
de la char des gencives	from the root of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is born on the gums flesh knotted, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the blood run; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other powders restraining and drying; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is putrid; so you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus do of blackness and greenish hue, and jaundice and other spots, until they are wiped out; and if one removes what there is at the first attempt, it is good; if those do not, he recommences on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments for removing, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes outside the teeth has other forms than that with which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait for the drawing as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to endure pain, it is necessary that you are certain of which tooth aches. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the sick person leaves and thinks that it is a tooth of Saint, and makes milk the good tooth; and altogether does not depart the pain by this, as long as the evil remains, because we have already wanted to do this with our saints; and when you are well certain about the tooth hurting, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth to all i. spatula strong to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it to your two or tongs subtly at the first point and point, until it is well removed, then firmly affirm the tongs; and let the patient's head in your saint between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and put it inside each side gently, and move it as you did first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages, where the holes are; and if you restrain it gently with tweezers so that it does not break when restrained; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore take good care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient through the malice of the root greater pains than the first.  
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard yourself that you do not act as the ignorant physicians who by their haste and boldness sometimes break a bone and bring no remedy for what we have recounted; but they cause to come often through this incision great illness for the roots that remain there, or for the broken bone, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash its place with wine or oil and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol ground; and if that does not work, cauterize it.  
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, as to how one pulls out the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and be toothed for to grip firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the teat, it is necessary that you put upon it cotton moistened with butter for a day or two. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the eye is closed, put in the tongs that are called "algefri," so that the head seems like a bird's beak; and make them inside like a file, and this is the shape.  
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because of this its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with those, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front in the arrangement of teeth, and this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which here is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not all counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such maladies where the old ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, or he can, then seek the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgins, it behooves that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it nor trim it; therefore the ray; and if it is pierced with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and resembles a little beak, and be of sharpened iron at its summit:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope little by little in hands days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then the file of a certain form like this is.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in hands days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plain at the end to all none razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness so that it be equal, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front breaks, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it to make it move without it coming out, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and it is no use; if they are required to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the thread be medium neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see it necessary to advance the teeth, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the broken pieces between the good teeth, if there are one or more, until you come sagely up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and sagely, so that it does not move at all; and let your tie be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grip the chies of the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth and the one that is broken, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue; then leave it tight as much as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the wires break, then restrain it with another wire; let it remain and serve like this throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and the two broken ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, fresh against fresh, as we have said; and no one should intervene unless they are wise and experienced, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from a piece of bone, and it is placed in the space where there is a deficiency, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to close the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this bond comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a stitched wound; and the work is such that you operate the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous tie large, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from the welding of a wound, then put the awl and cut the large ligament; and guard that the cutting be not too deep, for the artery which is beneath; and when you have done, lift the place with rose water and oil, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply this to the patient every night, that the places may not weld together. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put on the place powdered vitriol; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the fine cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatment until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of rotten color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then put in the probe, and make it with a spatula subtle, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop at your work, then put on top powdered vitriol until it is scorched, then return to your work as long as you draw out all matter; then lift the location of oil and water, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come from within the throat boils that are called «godath», and these they call properly the II almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, if you take care: if it is abscesses hard of small sense and of fusse color, then do not touch them with iron.  
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also to avoid bloodletting; but let it be left until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open, or it would break on its own; and if it is of white color, and the root is thin, have your instrument ready to cover, but first look if the abscess heals and is calmed. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his shoulders be in your health, and he opens his mouth and the surgeon puts the instrument between his hands, and presses the tongue below with all the instrument, of this is the form; and be it of silver or steel as fine as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and pull it upward as much as you can; and do nothing with the fabrics with it, then cut with the instrument, from which this is the form, that seems like a force; and anyway, the chief are curved, and one place the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, from which this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one side, and on the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and thus, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranate fruits be cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cut them then like the two almonds accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was near inside her throat, that is to say the small abscess; and I had closed up the whole throat well, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one day or two. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high it had to be put two fingers through each of the two openings. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I placed therefore so much and put it in one incision, then I pulled the thread outwards, and in pulling a large portion of bowel; then I refit another part into the other place of the two, and worked the mouth and pressed the tongue; after I put the needle into these abscesses, and copied a part, and there came out only a bit of blood; and thus was opened the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I tightened it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remained without growing; and I parted from these parts, and know only that God did to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the shape of the grape becomes raised at the base and it is plump and long, it is called “perpendicular”; and if it is less thick and rounded, it is called “grape”. 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the pus of the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of blood color or black, then it is necessary that you drain the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril to the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument of which we have made mention before; then place the needle in the eye, and pull it out, and cut with the II instruments that I have said in the incision of the II almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice, and to speech; and after the incision, use those things that we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, then it is necessary that you use something to the cauterization of the senses of fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute.  
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confides with a sharp quick shoe, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and in employing the end of this instrument, for this is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And has or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and puts the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and the mucus come from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the breast; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it being nursed and the stings of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the vein above, as long as the cotton dries on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it dry, and wait after .iiij. days or .v.. And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, start it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton wrapped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured by gargarismes until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or any of them in one pot, and put them therein, and boil; and the pot should be well glued with firm earth, and inside the pot has one instrument shaped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it silver or bronze, and be one of the shoulders thrust into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the grape by the vein, until the grape is mortified; afterward he starts over, as long as the grape dries up, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and put inside its head a piece of wood, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the piece of wood does not make the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is good cure altogether health. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens to the throat bone or spine of fish, or anything else; so therefore it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and those that do not appear to you and are returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will throw out the thing dry through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one mouthful of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will be felt, and then you will draw out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take one instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head high lifted; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to it, nor thrust in the bone; and it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, because he shall know if the thing is hoarse; if then he thrusts down, or he draws it forth equally throughout the instrument, as long as it is forth.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat cutting
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is given to the patient without bloodletting, as I have said in the division; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then that you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, treat it with all the little pincers or subtle forceps that are suitable for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a sheared dog hair and put it in the throat of the sick person, then put where the end of the dog hair is hot iron, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And he keeps the patient in water all day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full the cup of cold water, and work the mouth, and place it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he falls.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not heal as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the smoking of grapes; do this many times, because it will heal without suffering. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has charcoal in it, and let the bottom be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in this put the head of the instrument; then you throw your fumigation in it, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes up to the sinus; and the sinus will now fall, and if it doesn't fall, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and chew things salty and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it be done by this governance.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the sinus is, when one can see it, like tongs curved to enter into the throat; and it has the semblance of a bird's beak, and there is roughness from lime so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after this in one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in II manners which one is in its same appearance, and from that which holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the limbs which are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscess of the flesh is other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work. 
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if on abscesses one must not pierce until the bowel is mature according to its fulfillment; and if on such ones that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as abscesses which are near joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is completely rotten, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, therefore this is the cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until it is mature, it will harm the principal limb. When it is near the foundation, then pierce it so that it matures. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is mature according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where most dependent the location of the abscess, and where it opens more; and whether the piercing is long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these which are dislocated, according to the member. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is well that you let the opening remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.  
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before those things, then the body of the vein will be lengthened from him, and it is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of him. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring to small abscesses, small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart, and to cover; when it is become as I drapes, and is softened, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils: and if there are such that are cut in III angles, and if there are such which one covers as the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angles; and if there are such where one makes a round size, and other sizes and seeming cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, like a superficial abscess, it behooves you to pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then plug the abscess until the other day, then drain nothing directly; do this many times from great to small, until the pus is gone entirely; similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit often trembles with the issue of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not despair. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, then administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen rags without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then the bone, and cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bloodletting happens in your work, then administer cold water and apply it, and wet the drapery, and place it on the bleeding spot many times.  
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the discharge of blood persists, administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is wintertime, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and drapes moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is summertime, and the wound is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on damp cloths in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then undo the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this it behoves to know universally in cures of abscesses: Or I have said how one must go before the cures of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	Of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the heart of the head comes small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in fabrics, as well as the joint of a gooseberry, and much in them similarities. 
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture as well as poultices; and there are some that are hard and stony in the waist, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are that you use to every instrument that is called "intromissioris," because its form comes after here, what it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let him apply warmth from above to the long.  
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, then scrape without leaving the hair which contains that moisture, because it returns quickly when one leaves it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain after this are cleansed.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the cotton again, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the wound; then cure the wound with ointment to that which is suitable, until it be healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the fat, then cut according to this form, long; and place your probes there, and the skin on all sides, and put all your care into draining the sweat where it lies; and if the artery does contrary, then do that which I have told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same with an abscess if it is purulent, and of the cutting and curing as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision upon the pus-filled abscess and the moisture is lighter because they are of little blood.  
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated or chiefs of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had made any incision on it, one would have done to him as well a wound as with a stone.  
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, for that which comes at the chief of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening shall be always at the lowest point, so that it may better discharge pus; and the cure as is fitting.  
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come elsewhere on the body, and are bad, and lie one next to another.  
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofulous is properly inside its coat, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofuls are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that therefore which you see of good disposition at the touch, and seems to the color of the body, and mute from each side and is not harsh to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not deep; so it is necessary that you cut it from above, and the skin of each part, and keeping the two lips of the heart apart, if you have need, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and the treat piece by piece, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be the spatula big nor trenches, that the hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and constrain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to ripen. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then examine with your index finger if there remain any small pustules, and cut them and drain them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has in the root of the scrofula a vein great, then it does not behoove that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply to the wound old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scrofulous [boil], it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no delay of superfluity for the size of the scrofulous. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	So it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and drain pus, and treat it as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more; and pierce as those before said, in depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remained of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, there care of ointment to bring on flesh, until it be healed. 
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be opened; and one should not help them because all the veins and the prominences of the sick person are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the prominence, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four with a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and these are so suitable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from which. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the neck, then cleave the heart as far as it comes to the windpipe; and escape the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the windpipe which leaps from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed of which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and cut all alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so long as it be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim said that one should not do this until the throat is completely constricted, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the failure of the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took the knife, and she put it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the pharynx; and I was called by her to cure her, and I found her as dead.  
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and well that it had not been opened a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I made it haste, and thus I closed the wound, and I cared for it until it was healed; and there came to the lady nothing but that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis, one should have no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and is a large abscess in the color of a boil, and it is mostly in women; and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; where natural has no engine.  
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to fat to us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not behoove to work to do beyond this one that is small, and prove and search at all the intruder: if you find it as I our fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as we cut the ours, and treat it to its whole point, if there is any; and enclose well soon, and cure it as it behoves, until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	of our (ones)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many manners of us there are, which I shall say all the resemblances; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference which is between our and exit.  
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling has not passed, and is complete the rottenness; therefore, rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a bruise, and becomes big; and there are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and many colors are as I said in the division.  
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of wounds, that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire," according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of probing abscesses as we do is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two pokes and pokes, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then when it is according to the size of the abscess; then remove the introducer, and be careful in what jumps. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs short, what color it has, do as I said of other abscesses; and if after the introducer none comes moisture, know that it is fat, so treat it in a cross, and take it with pliers, and scrape lightly on each side and ward the cot where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the spout; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then drain it in pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car if it stays there nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and constrict the wound, and put above soothing things, hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the swelling is great, stitch the two lips of the wound, and cure from that which engenders flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beating is contrary to you or otherwise hurry and apply the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie two days or three, as long as the wound rots, and rest the boiling of blood; then return to cover those that are remaining of the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the instruments for pessaries, and they are in III ways: large, medium, and small; and there are III squares called "albaret", and I which is called "breb", and there are in III ways: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistulas; and they are also like needles with which one sews sorcerers' spells, and they are of citrine brass, or iron, or silver, and most valued are those which are yellow, and are more proven of black plumb to enclose the curves of fistulas; and they are in III ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the openings. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are probes that have II curves of III manners also; and there are probes that have III curves, and are also of III manners; and there are probes that have II curves, and probes of a single curve only, and are of III manners; and all these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these things is made to cut, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, because they remove the flesh. For this reason one does not harm the vein nor the nerve; and of these instruments are the alemeles put back in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses; and they are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses none more than on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places. And sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling a fist-shaped scalpel, according to this form, for which one drains blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed sometimes in the place where there should be a cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes reopened according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like a woman’s breasts; and remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he must follow this form according to these lines from b to g. 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if it seems to be cline down, and is softened for its size as it happens to women, so make it in two ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the loss of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it moistens the remaining fat, then cure it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous lumps or boils and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those then who contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment beforehand as long as it is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of a similar appearance to scrofulous ulcers, then treat it as we have said in incisions of scrofulous ulcers, and if the wound is full of pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn above it, then many times abscesses come, and just as often it happens to the vein inflamed and abscessed; and if you know that this is because of the artery, so the abscess is long along it; and when you feel it at your fingertips, you feel a straining; and when it is because of the vein, it feels hard and swollen in appearance; and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is below the armpits and under the arms and on the neck and in many other places, and is very large.  
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and in that which is at the head, it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is of artery inflammation made from above the skin long; then work the waist as soon as possible, and depart beautifully the artery from the webs, until it is discovered; then put below it a needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and strain the artery with a double thread in II lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in temples; then point the place that is between the II ties of an intromissoire until the pus that is there comes out, and make the abscess open; then administer the cure that encloses the bow, until the tie holds; then cure those of ointment coming before these, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, you must hold in your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle below the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be the double thread, so that you pull it out on the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, or tie of one of the II parts of the II chies of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, put another needle to all the thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and strain the threads in IIII lengths; then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity of the skin and leave what is tied; then put on top the draping wet with wine and oil, then administer cures of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are rubbed, or by too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often to shoulders and hips and in all their places where there are joints, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in more dispositions without pain; and when one constrains it, then the patient feels pain, and is not completely formed of the body, but below the heart; and moves well from all sides, and does not go neither forward nor backward, neither down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go into contraction; and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin to the spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, and flay it, then empty it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of great boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the roots are fine, and the head is large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had II in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine root, and they were partly cut, and moist came out from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found in one XVIII ounces, and in the other VI З., and the work in incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root; if the cope at the spatumile wide, and be in your presence the cautery at the fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the hip often come many times very great hemorrhages of blood, and if the blood does not stop, then quickly you cauterize it; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a thread of lead well made, and in bind the limb as we have said, and let him for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of lead until he has bound the limb, and cut by him without work; and if the roots are large, then fear to cut the same way for the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the skin which is of fox color and poor with pus and milk. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess that has broken open, and I will come to the treatment of sores after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has matured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the skin, and it is on the belly and has some of the boils, as they have in other ruptures, or of blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if this is from the rupture of the skin and the exit of the boil, then the color of the abscess seems like the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from diverse issues.  
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it in your hand, do not constrain at all; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it feels soft to the touch, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary that you leave the care.  
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said to you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be extended straight, then feel all around the boil; then command him to gently move between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upwards to the entire great incision; then tie it around a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the two ends be loose; then operate on half of the abscess extended on the thread, and put your index finger, and feel the intestine; if you find it caught by the thread, then untie it, and put the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the boil, take it at the incision, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, then go well around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II through threads, and put the II needles around what you have done in a cross that you make perceivable; then strain the abscess on IV lengths on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it will dry out, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and dried up, then cure of what it should, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it should be, and weld the place.  
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure; and let us say that an ulcer is avoided in moist places, and great caution should be taken in its cure, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the armpit, and in the groin, and similar places, and it must be entirely removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never healed any of them; nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge at any time the patient of black cole; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient i. good place to do the work; then set your incisions or sores, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow completely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the hemorrhage of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is extinguished; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; this is exposed only; and one must not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hyposarca, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called “eclyses” with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and diarrhea and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spatula spine according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be deep cut of two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point, and nonetheless be not so deeply inserted that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and cannot stitch it up; then look whether the dropsy is formed toward the intestines: if so, you should cut into it from below the third part of the blade III fingers directly above the hilt; and if the dropsy is for the disease of the liver, then make your cut on the left side of the third part of the blade; and if it is for the spleen, then on the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lies on the cut so that superfluities do not run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bring it out, and raise your hand across the entire spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as in scraping to the quantity of an ungle or more; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the level eight, and this is the place of the water, then pull the syringe, and put this instrument out for this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver knife, subtle, and it is of iron or lighter arch-metal, and on the lower part, I have a small hole; and on one side, III holes; and II on the other side, and I on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now on the instrument. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt on the patient, and give him much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and with sweat or bath and in the sun, and let him drink; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	At no time are born children who have no pores on the penis, or the pores are small, or they are not in their place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, then immediately so he can perceive all of the spatula very subtle according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or put in the fine clove of lead, and tie it and hold it so for III days or IIII and when he wants to urinate, have it removed, and let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it does not suit, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose piercing is small, so it is medicated with the lead of plant, as we have said, so it will widen. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the part in their place are pale, because none are born with the part at the head of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad illness. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies usually on his back, and are the head of the rod and the cope as well as the waist of a pen, so that the pierced falls in the middle, as it convieneth; and keep yourself from overflowing of blood that often comes, and if it happens, then the stanch of those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is sound.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these boils come in the rod, and it is an appearance of flesh ugly; and there are malignant and non-malignant; so it convieneth that you prick them with .i. oncine subtle, and the cope and cleans all, then put up cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is sound.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color and pus, then it befits you to bring cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the bone is in some place of inside the skin and part within and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the bone which is inside first; and when it is joined, then care for the part outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, make sure the head of the rod is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come to its rod and where it joins; so cover all that is black and corrupt, then apply on top a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and veins, then cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two ways: that is to say, for the letting of blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must put or lead on the penis a chain of lead, and urinate the patient among; and when the skin is raw at the head of the penis who have not been circumcised, or they have for wound or for abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument's edge, until the connections are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula any point of the head of the penis and the skin; then gently separate between the two, and put the subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not dry out. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a wound of continuity like the others; however, when we do this work by our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the most part of masters and healers who practiced circumcision around one dal, and with force, and at all times with a new scalpel; thus it was their custom because there are two cloths, and by chance if one cuts above and remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is necessary to cover, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is with the hole of the member it is not assured; and in the purification of the elbow by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they did not need purification and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is made with force to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you press your hand, so it is equal in I whole soul tense; but that the child be well straited to the skin; and let the manner of the first work be as if you make the child think, if it understand, that you only tie the string around the rod just so, and then allow him to rejoice in all ways that you can; then make him stay between your hands straight, and put the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and bring it up as long as the head of the rod is inside; then purify it well of the dirt which is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double string, then tie it below I poc at the other lien; and hold it as II does by the second lieeure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the II liens, then lift the heart upwards gently and bring the head of the rod; then leave the blood to flow a little, because it is the movement; and put powder on and on the powder I drapeil glued with an egg yolk cooked untampered with rose water, confit with good and fresh rose oil, and let it stay until the next day, and cure him from another cure as long as he is healthy.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the purification is this: the two heads be held and be sharp, and be the heads also as large as the hand evenly;
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the leaves make an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pierce for three days, and what is below the shaft is swollen, let it be as long as the abscesses are calmed and the scabs are slightly scraped; if you can cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, heal the place of things suddenly with a wound powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut out the kernel beyond measure, and it goes upwards, it will not harm; therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is from a stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or fatty tissue, or similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then it behooves the patient to be bent on his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient’s legs as much as he can; and thus it constrains the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it behooves you to administer an extraction with all the instrument which is called a “syringe,” from this is its form: and let it be made of fine silver, light-headed, like the feather of a bird; and let the shaft be a palm long and a half, and let it be thin at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take I double thread, and tie it to the head I piece of wool or cotton, and put the head dou thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it until the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin d'uef, and make the patient sit on I seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tede water; then gently put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bud; then put the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient come until the void thing, and this is not done according to this order further than for those who lead or where it goes is twisted; then is the thread at all wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make correct the urine; and restart the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and be aligned the patient. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood comes in the bladder, or there is an assembly of rot, and you see it distilled with sharp and medicines, do as all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III perforations: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the leus chevez by which the medicine short be such that it stops well the shaft without addition, if one can drain the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see fit to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief dou keusteur in the moisture, and train with the traiant that is within; so you will drain the moisture to the kesteur, and then push back firmly the traiant within; so the moistors will enter within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster by which one clysters the bladder: it is here:  
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of bronze, and the head is higher; and below to the breast where the bond falls; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you see the clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the point of the clyster on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the anus, then strain your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming down, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it a circle, and pierce it roundly throughout; then put the strong thread in these pierced holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dial, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.  
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have just said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder more often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder similar to water in its subtility; and it appears harsh, and grieves the patient his penis, and he can many times, and then it enroids; and with much of these leaps the foundations are made; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age; and it is the cure lighter of those who have the large stone, than of those who have it small.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it hinders sometimes to seek the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and push them out and move down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it emerges from its high position; then make him sit between your hands with his arms under his thighs, so that the bladder is all inclined downwards; then grasp and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the touch of all, so moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and put it in its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press upwards on your finger, and put it out to the far side where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him that he extends with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula cuttingly, from which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between that which is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight above the stone, and the two sides are either foundation or above, and let the waist be with a traverse so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps press the side which is foundation or above, so that it may go out without work; and know that there are such stones which have angles, and margins: if it is pierced to this; and if it is like one with a glint, and rounded, whose outlet is light. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To this one, then where there are angles and margins, make the incision greater; and if it does not come out, you should extract it with pliers which are like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put under it the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the hole of the passage, and if the stone is loose, then extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first put the biggest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the larger one comes out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very great, it should be treated, and make a larger wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Car two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the place where the legs cannot close; but all the same, you try to treat it, or to break it with pliers, as long as you pull it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, you put on the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and you restrain it, and put on top of it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bind the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you unbind it, carefully moisten the area with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basilican ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and because of this urine is held back, which is known in such a manner that without leaping with the urine: therefore you must drain it in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause burning; then raise the wound with water and honey and seil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you care for him, that you tie his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the place.  
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is where the urethra conducts, and is tied within, and the urine cannot issue; so the cure of those that I say thus, that you cut it many times, and are excused from the cutting by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus. 
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron shaped like this and have it fitted with three points on one end.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the forest into the shaft lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the forest in your hand on the stone point by point, as long as you can feel the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken, and bursts with urine, and the patient heals; and if you cannot do this for any reason which hinders it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make the rod straight against the stone between the two threads, then extract it, and untie the thread, and cleanse the clotted blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones are present in women, and if it happens at any time, it is a serious ailment, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a woman well knowing who discovers herself to the eyes, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the woman's stone is more inward than the man's, so it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises for this, it is necessary that you take a wise midwife, and with pains, find one, and if you cannot find one, point does not desire I cast aside a subtle mirror; and present her a well-knowing girl in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her about the examination of the stone; and look carefully whether the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to thrust her loin or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it under her loin, and recommends that she thrust her loin or cone with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder form.  
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder down, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is seen to appear, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move its two above the stone or below, and let the tail be first small; then put the rail into the waist, if you feel the stone so across the wound as long as the stone can issue out, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and soft, long and round, and which have reins. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearances to know the outcome.  
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the sinew is weak, put on vitriol ground finely, and hold it for an hour until the sinew is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone is present, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone to men so that you can help in your work; and if the sinew is weak, and it is the artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and strain with bandages, and do not begin again this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, lest the patient die; then cure the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limbs are numb, then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is the under part of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called 'syfac', and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these did not have this point.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is re-open, I poc long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are re-opened with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white sac, then it is felt well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine the entire introducer, because its form is as described before. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the repletion of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him many cloths; then sit on his left, and command the minister that he sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the sides; then take the spatula clean, and cut the skin of the sides among them long until near the heel, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the sides up to the white bone, and peel it subtly according to your power; then pierce the white bone full of water at the wide opening, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages, and extend the white bone upward; and do not touch the heart of the sides, but only the white bone; cut everything or by pieces equally well, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return the water; and if the union has failed in your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the white bone; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the sides with one suture, then cure him as other wounds, until he is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the bone corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the bone along with the entire suspender, and draw out the bone, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as well as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put on the wound a pad half in rose oil; and put outside another pad half in wine and oil, and put it on top of the two pads, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it up with all the linen according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and use wool felt according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the heads presses on the foundation up to the back, and the other to the armpit; and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and be all assembled the restraint in the loop of the brazier; and at any time is medicine this branch of cautery in place of iron size, and it is that you prick I cautery knife subtle, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syrup which contains the water is uncovered; take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syrup at once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cope in all ways that you can, as long as you sear everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more safe; and moves guarding against loss of blood, and moves that the works of size; and if any thing makes you contrary, or abscess heals or loss of blood or other thing, so cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, so administer a perforation as I tell you; and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that water root is there, then make the patient sit on the elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to all the width of the spatula, and put the perforation long through the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and leave for the remainder of the water to flow out, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, then you must pour into it a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of dropsy, for its form is before mentioned; and enlarge the hole of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or whenever it comes around, and when it is assembled like before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the genitals
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in more dispositions, for which it seems to me that it is better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and resemblances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; and it is by many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by superfluity sour and aguish, which is spread to the joints, or by percussion; and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a painful abscess; and by chance are some abscesses grieved fearful and stony, and of foxed color, and at times comes from none artery, or swelling of vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is through an artery, so it is known by the arrangement of hot abscesses, when you press it with your thumbs; and it is not appropriate that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the vein's inflation is known by his disposition to the touch of the two, and one can well make the cut on this semblance, and on the other parts; and it is that you strike the core of the veins, then the egg is above, and the thread of the white side by side, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already joined with these new vessels, then it is necessary that you draw the yolk, and cut it; and if it is adhered to the sac, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that, and cut the roundness. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is or its rear, it behoves you to cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then the cure of other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the genitals
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling the onion, with softening of the boils, and the patient moves painfully when it goes; and the cure of this disease is as frighteningly well as this one before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your two hands, all the vessels which are near the member, and the masters tie them and stretch them; then cut with the sharp spade wide through the middle between the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then put a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as with the others where one injures a bowe, so that no vessel should be cut which nourishes one of the testicles; because by this nothing comes to harm, and if to all the vessels comes blood, it is necessary to drain the testicles to all the vessels; so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment for the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The happening of this ramification is by the section that comes or there it happens, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners; and this rupture is either at the syfac or of the extension of it, and these two manners of much come from causes: whether percussion, or leap, or braire, or lifting of a heavy load, and by similar things; and the signs when it's of the extension of the syfac, there are pock and pock, in long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until the midpoint, because the syfac tightens the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the pus, that it brings a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears various ways, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are drawn with the pus, and it is held in, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, because one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to return the intestine into his hand into the wound, if it can enter; then be supported on his neck between your hands, and raise the hips; then hold the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the groin along; then put inside the folds of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and so that the bowels may issue; then scrape the soft tissue which is below the skin of the groin, until the white soft tissue is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white soft tissue which is below the skin of the egg, and between the second soft tissue, and depart that which is behind the egg, and between the second soft tissue; and then move with the right hand into the heart of the groin, and hold the white soft tissue at the top to your left hand, and raise the egg on all the soft tissue towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the egg upwards, and untie that which is behind the ligament; and inquire with your fingers if there is no intestine enveloped or white soft tissue hard, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below; then take a needle which has a thick thread made of X threads, and put it into the back part of the soft tissue, which is after the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the chives that appear of the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the soft tissue, of which we have said that it is below the skin of the groin, with a strong thread of II parts; then envelop the chives of the threads, and tie them formed of II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except an abscess may come; and put the thread straight according to the first long thread II fingers of it, and after these II threads leave the soft tissue which is below the heart of the groin the width of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the groin, as much as the sinew, and the bow, as we have said before; then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it into the wound, and put into it the thread that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at any time is cauterized the white fascia that we have said, after the incision, out of doubt of a flow of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the thread as long as it hangs from it; and if it is slow to come out, so that it be risen with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it comes out; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is assembled with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of him who works, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture comes in the inguinal region, as we have said, and it opens the legs; and no parts of the bowels come out to the groin, and if any do come out, it is little, and repairs all hours; and anyway if it remains too long in this point, then the wound or abscess grows, as long as the bowel comes out; and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is in the inguinal region, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen the legs and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is that the patient lies softly on his back between your hands, then cut the skin of the rupture inflated by the width according to the quantity of III fingers; and then extract the abscess which is below the skin that the inside, then take the thread and put it over the place appearing of the abscess; and press it to the bottom of the belly, then stitch the two legs appearing of the abscess onto the top of the thread, and stitch one and the other; then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut the abscess nor extend the gut or anything else, as I have made you know in the cure of the ramification of the bowels; then cure by the cure of the wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and treat the wound, until it is healed.  
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it becomes visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then assembles the two lips with a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the sutures, and the cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the  castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterization is practiced in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the wise should be able to answer when asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often have need of cauterization of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that cauterization is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the joints are softened and pliable; then taking them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.  
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of tail: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut above each testicle with a blow when you have well scraped them; and leave no prick or subtle prick which is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing remains of the testicles, because the beast desires lust; then care for the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to II manners in men: the one if it is that between the II sexes opens as well as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it comes about on the point as well as a rod and they copulate.  
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of man and woman is that you cauterize all joined wounds, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of their penis, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	Of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wart is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tendon with your hand or awl, and trim it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed; and for another sore that arises at the mouth of the furrow, and the ear, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and because of this, the ancients called it "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to cut it, as we have said the tendinitis, and care for it until it is healed. 
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or by accident by disease that came to it; or it is by flesh joined, or by subtle or thick syrup, and is made through in the ribs, or costal, or below, or where it may be; and prevent conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the regard of the belly. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is near appearance, if you want to at two or to the root.  
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If he is to be treated with subtle syfac, and he is near the two books, then hurry, and do this: put the two fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, legs spread; then extend the two books, so that the subtle syfac is round, and covers the swelling; then take wool, and wet it in oil, and put it over there, and let the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the abscess is hard and thick, then you must cut it with the spatula like a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stupor is of flesh origin, then suspend it to the hinge and cover it; and have the medicines that staunch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, together with a handful of egg white; then administer a bandage of wide linen, so that the wound may not close; and thus for length of time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured with other cures until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes new matter, it should be covered according to this manner, if it is not inflamed abscesses. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is festering which is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom become accustomed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thick; and we have said in the division the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve healing.  
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the boil, when they are full in the marrow, and do not appear to the touch, except for the cure by iron.  
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, can feel, are those that can be cured. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the tumor with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confection it with honey and aisil, and with that make a plaster on her back.  
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stays still, it is good.  
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it is not so, apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring; then take linen, and moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, so care its place of ointment until it is healed; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to the harsh chief, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text; and then the cure until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and pus-filled abscess, and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more diseases that I have said in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It therefore befits me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not like abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is thick at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let him be made better until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have he small seats or he may lean, and support on his back and assemble his feet towards the outer part of the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good linen band; then turn him to the right side, and there administer the instrument which is used to open the mouth of the belly, from which after comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see to administer this instrument, that you make the point first in order to know the depth of the belly, so that what enters into the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and that it does not pierce the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the belly with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and that he hold the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and one softens it with their hand, then it is fitting to cover the head with a spatula, lead; and when the bowel is emptied, it is fitting that you put into the wound damp tents in rose oil or green dry oil; and place the tent from the wound to the edge of the margin, and put outside above the margin and on the linen cloth clean moistened in water or malves should be cooked; then cure after II days of ointment coming to this, until it is healed; and at no time lift the margin and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia long are cooked; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set back in its bed, it behooves you to guard against iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	A profession is first to the delivery that she knows the figure of the natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down low, and desires to smell the air: then it hastens the child to come forth; therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under its head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is fitting to gently press her belly, so that the child comes forth soon; for when it descends upon its head, then the secondine is with him, and the mother is delivered of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes at times on its feet, and comes toward the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes on its belly, or spine, and is converted by chance on its neck, and other bad forms; so it is necessary for the healer that she be wise and subtle in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes upon its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth loudly, and the virtue of it is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and rose her nature of oil or fennel seed shall be cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and cut at its fingernail until the moisture that is within it is expelled; and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with fennel seed mucilage with sesame oil; then make her take and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now the child will be born. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are out, it is necessary that you put them back gently one by one; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up; then overturn the seat onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when it is overturned; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the neck which is in front of placed, and extract the child, and put them back evenly.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child upon his feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on his feet, it is necessary to push him upward; and then turn him back and forth, until he is equal; then grasp his feet and extend them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Let him jump to his hips, if he is commanded to do so, and have him cough from the condition; and jump further if God wills it. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then turn it back and forth until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk from the high altar, and oil of sesame, and gum resin, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a hot bath until under the ribs; and when she is softened there, make her colic with myrrh, and put it down below, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on the stool, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, because the child now leaps. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, she puts her hands back and forth on his waist; then she is placed on her back, and she hangs her legs down, and lying on the bed; and she bends her hands back and forth, and then she takes her hands over her belly, and she removes the cushions underneath, until she is laid down; and if the child does not jump up, she takes his legs and moves them forward, then moves the belly upwards, then puts her hands in; and holds the child back and forth; and commands the woman to hold herself tight as long as the child is coming out.  
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child which comes out with a wide hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It behooves to engage in bringing the hand back; if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her bed and straighten her legs; then administer the poultice that I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on the stool, then study in bringing the hand back; and bring the child according to its natural figure, and have her sneeze, and command her to bear down as long as the fetus is coming out.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child upon his neck, and has spread her hands, and her face turned towards the back of her mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient hold his hand, then turn it back and forth, and lightly; and when it is equal, he places on the muscle layer of height and oil, as we have said, then commands him to move it back and forth; and when you have done this, you make her sit on the seat, and command her to press; and she sneezes. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to the entire shoulder
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner to the whole secondine, so strike the secondine at your finger, until the moisture is emptied; and if the child cannot raise its head and neck, then cut the bud so that it is not retained, and kill the child; then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to refrain from any movement: therefore she will give birth easily. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the separation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if they can be named; I know those, that they should be multiplied, and are divided by the syfac which devises them, which is bound to the bud; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one all under, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are coming out badly, the cure as we have said, and be the bail subtle, and quickly make and lightly what she does; and do so as it is worth moving to salvation.  
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because by chance similar things happen; so do according to what is necessary. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her shoulders be inclined down, and the legs raised; and the minister the tail of II parts, where she is bound to the bed so that she is not moved by the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the marrow with moist oils with mullein of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the ball of her hands with these oils and these mulleins; then put them in the marrow lightly, then take where she puts the pins that should be suitable for them, and take ward if the infant is appeared that it descends on its head; so insert the pins in its eyes or in its neck or in its mouth or in its palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then put it or prickle and at the sides of the body; and it is necessary that he hold the pin with his right hand, and place the bend between his thumbs of the left hand, and puts it to all his hand lightly, and insert the pin in any of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the pin:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place against the other one, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then move them equally in one direction and the other, so they may pass easily, and let the one be toothed to hold them tight, as is the form here: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains a part, one anoints the basin of some of his oils, and puts them in that part, and draws the other part; and if none remain, he puts this oncine or higher place, and does this until it all goes out entirely.  
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward from the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you should wrap it in a cloth until it is whole; then cut in the joint of the foot or at the wrist, and so you should do with the other hand, and both feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp point assembled, then it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two fingers, and make the head and extract the sharp point; or you can do it with the instrument called "almidach," so that its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way, do if the child has a large head naturally; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head goes out and it is strained by force, then split it, as long as the moisture which is or worse issue forth; and if it cannot issue forth, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is inflamed in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs out.  
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is in the belly or the breast, then it is necessary that you take it out with the cloth wrapped on the hand; and make the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture there is gone; and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then put the handle of your hand to enter into the marrow, and draw it until the mouth of the marrow; then put in the string or II, and pull out; and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot boil that has come, then it is not necessary to work, but it is necessary to administer moist and greasy things; and administer plasters, and siege in soft and moisturizing water.  
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, administer those that we have said in a living child; and if one has no power, so it will be treated by pieces, and leave nothing of the second skin. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you will have done this, if it happens to him those things which we have said on abscesses that come in the marsh; and if bleeding occurs, then be put in sharp restraining, and administer other treatments to him. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been stillborn, then conceived another upon that one, and refused the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time it came to her an abscess in the bosom, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to great pus flow.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I pondered long time, and could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because this one whose belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and in my hand bones, until the woman was in better condition; and I saw the woman long time thus, and she did it back a little bit of good; and I have not recorded this chapter for that reason, because when the masters find a strange thing, they should know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the bone to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the forceps, as it is written in the books; and to two turns as two handles of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle in the restrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft must be wide, and the edge of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be adjustments of this same shaft, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the handle to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar in appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers; and it has two jaws adjustments, as you see, an arm's length long, and two wide; and when you see opening the vagina with the entire instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, feet hanging and legs open, then put the two jaws together in the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then operate your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the patient does what she wants.  
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the one sees them appear, so much is the work hastened, and higher to the men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is held back during childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to hold her arm, and then make her sneeze from condiments, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well is.  
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this is not done, then take a pot and make it perforated, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or steeped in water over the fire; then put a cord or perforated around the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and tie it until the vapors come from within the marsh; then make her sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps back suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and there is no force, command the woman to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in the muslin of althea, and then put it into the vagina, and pull on the second one; and when she has found it, seize it and stretch it back and forth gently, so that the thread does not break during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes and breaks. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the nostrils is inflamed and squeezed shut, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, so guard that you do not use the milk; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the nostril, that you tie it to the hip of the woman, then the clisterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if she will bear and put back, and will come good; but all ways, when she bears it so there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and pales the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary then for fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the time of childbirth and afterwards is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let the fumigations be above the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burned, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	To examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped with a subtle syfac: so it behooves the midwife that she pierce that syfac at its place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatumile, and guard the lacement so that it does not touch; then put on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop up, then put on a piece of lead upon the wound, and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes from the closing of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closure: if it is cured, as we have said about the cauterization of flesh.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and larger ones that come from near the foundation of fur, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it works, and still moisture surrounds white or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas disappear; and they are known by those who have them with discharge or flatulence when the patient defecates, and by chance some jump out. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and to half the penis; and reach up to the groin joint, and to under the hipbone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the foundation, and not piercing; and it is that you put your left index or foundation, and put a subtle needle of steel or iron in the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has a twist, put a tent of fine lead or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair at your fingertip; and if you do not feel it, and there is no emission from the opening or wind nor pus, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so haste in curing. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, so that urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the thread comes to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around, then it is that it there is bowe, and there is no medicine nor cure by ointment; and in these fistulas passing there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of fools who meddle with them. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one who is neither too young nor too old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proved, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined to his belly; then put a tent of araine, or of plonc if there is curvature, until you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the base, then you should put your index finger there, so that when it tugs he feels it; and be discovered or you feel between your finger the syfac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if you do not work it at all one cannot cure it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says forthwith that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely; and the help one makes, if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and put it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation; and do this II times or III, as long as you know that these charred fibers are burned, which are resembling a feather of eye; and then cure with moist tents in butter, as long as those chars isse were, then cure with ointment enjaring char and soldering.  
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, well.  
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is so, it cannot be cured otherwise; and if it extends in between and does not pierce to the root which is or foundation, and between your thigh and the tent you put a thick covering of flesh or silk, and you see the fistula at the end of the covering that follows the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward the tent, and then apply the cautery afterward, as long as it comes to the head of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and fall; then remove those fatty tissues that seem like a feather of an owl, and there remains nothing. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the without-skin goes in, and is caught between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine sharp.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery assembles II good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined bones and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then the cure of wet wounds in butter or crushed herbs, as long as the flesh lies low, and if the chars are burned in the cavity; then cure the wound with hard dough bandages, and they are dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes all the way down to the very base, and is separated from the body, then you put your finger or foundation in, and examine them.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between it is the cloth or syfac or chars, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways except by the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the III manners: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure it as before; and don't allow them to be too deep in that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and let the evacuations come by the way of willing; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound once it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or by another appointed instrument; then cleanse the char faultree which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to remain the fistula in the part outside the foundation: this will be lighter for the sick. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is or rests against the base of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: 
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And one puts two threads twisted together, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pushed into the edge of the base within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, as you push your finger or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it be for a day or two; and restrain it no times, until the threads have joined those that are between the two, and stick; then cure the wound as long as it is healed and sound.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make for the lacing covering if it is too deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spatheous spine from which one makes the fistula is very acute on one part and trenching; and on the other part no, for that's why one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here: 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are according to II manners: or they are inside the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short above blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the chief of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture, and still above or a little bit of citrine water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, is that you command the patient to stretch himself to go into rooms, until the foundations leave him, and appear the sons; if you hurry, and you can hold it with tweezers, or you hold it with your finger, then you cut it at its roots; and if the one-sine cannot hold them for their moistures, so take them to the drapeil, or to cotton, or a piece of chamelot; and they are extracted to your thumbs, then you cut them, and powder above some hot powders that be in their place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, since the cure of other cures until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot leave, so you clistrize the patient with a stinging and harsh clister to wash what is at the foundation, so that he can clearly leave; when the patient stretches, and if the sons are outside the foundation, then the cure is light; and is that you take them with your finger or tweezers, and you cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be it of the wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to drain the superfluity of blood; then place on the foundation a piece of cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on top of the foundation, and command the patient that he rest; and then let him rest until they are dry, and when they will be dry, cure them with ointment and other cures, until he is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Through drying of the fevers or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying of fevers in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and the medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape to the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it get moist; then treat it as long as it heals as it should; and if it cannot heal, re-scrape more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped; then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	about trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants is a little appearance false before the body, and go much in through them; and sometimes it finds them cold, and feel him also like dead of trembling, and comes in all the body, and more to the hands than other part. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a quill of an owl's feather, or a vulture's feather strong, and put that quill on the wound, until the purple circles stain the wound all around; then turn your hand over the whole quill until you cover the whole wound all around, and put it in its proper place, and scrape the wound from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do like that of a dog's iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not let it pierce, so as to hold at the two, and move pressing; And if you see this, cauterize the vein, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or copper, or melted iron or mesh; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then whom one administers care to for children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster small and large is above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and on one side there are II holes, and on the other I; and the belly where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there is I space; then put in these holes I strong thread of twisted silk X or wherever it encircles, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie the string in front with a strong thread, then administer an enema; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the chief of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently; then, sponge the ministers at his two hands together, until it is all visible, then withdraw the clyster, and lift the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps through the night entirely, then it is more help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him an enema for the sickness of a falling belly, and the medicine rushes out quickly, let it return as many times as necessary until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or an abscess, then use a clyster as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin should be strained: 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by striking of stone and sword and knife, or by spear or club or arrow, or similar things; which are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it is of a stone hit or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt an abscess: so make it bleed both from the cephalic same as if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bleeding opposite to the part numb; and eschew the patient's repletion of wine and of thick meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let him lessen his food and drink no wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in stippled wine; and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved by the air, put on some ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then assemble them by stitching, as I shall say about wounds of the belly, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to bone, and hangs, and holds only by a piece, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat thick meats, like beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.  
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a rotting skin and it does not reach the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw away the pus, then cure; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without a doubt, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put into this powder which binds so that when the wound has been cleaned.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood II parts; quicklime III parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this made with only quicklime when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but that the fire has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the surgeon has healed the wound, even in the state [of healing], do not put on this powder; but place some digested ointment, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with a wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pliers; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.  
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other means than to leave it to heal, and do not put anything restraining upon it, because it does harm to the nerve and makes it retract; and do not put upon the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as chalz washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucie washed also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is capped and full of bow, then pierce or lower them; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes, then cauterize it, and loathe it, and cauterize where necessary is; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the nerves, and the conduit is kept, because the flesh goes, so sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it according to its natural figure; and then restrain it well, and leave it for a few days, then cure it with ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then cover it; and if there are pieces of bone, treat them all so that you may, and those that you cannot have, let it rot until the wound is free and aligned the exit; and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said.  
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there is an exit of wind as the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, do not put anything to it in the first hour, nor tie it up so that the blood does not remain in depth, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but I put attractive ointment, and I bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor tremor of the heart, nor strangling of the breath; and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved.  
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat therefore with tents and other dressings, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, and work, know then that there is a fistula; so treat the wound as one should. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then the cure of those who are in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is deep in the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the fragments if they are exposed; and if they are not exposed, then let the wound rot, so that it will lighten the extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	Of the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from a great wound sometimes the intestine, or nerve of the intestines, comes out by which the introduction of others; and the suture is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than the small wound the large, because for this reason one puts back the intestines in, if one does not put them in hot and cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they return in more painfully, and therefore it is worth a hundred pains the middle wound, so that one must reset the intestine to its place as the others II And know that the rupture of the belly is according IIII manners: the II sutures common happen in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and II other sutures proper are common to other wounds; and all the same they are more suitable with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and declare. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has been thrust out, and it appears to be easy to put back, then it is done by one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water alone, or you cook in hot water with squill and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and at no time do this restraining it, and it is moved that awe only for to deflate. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and make sure it is cooked well, for by this they are aligned the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one operates on hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to moisten that tail, so that one should not cut it without great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: dig inside into the curve and outward no, and see here the form:  
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails have burst out, you put it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, because this is valuable. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your attention to that the wounded part be higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and medium wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	The small wounds put that which is appeared to you, then have between your hands I minister pitiful who holds all the rupture in his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitches, and is that you prick an awl or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound I measure of space, and there stick an awl where it has I good strong thread; and pierce the II heads of the skin with the II heads of the syphac, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the II heads of the syphac the II together; then the strain of a double thread around the awl of II parts, then assemble the II heads of the wound in agreement, and then leave I measure of space, and there stick another awl; then the tie of the thread as you have done the first awl, and do not cease of this doing according to what you have need of the awls, until all the wound is restrained; and let the awls be mean, between subtle and thick, for the subtle awls cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot well enter: for this reason it is necessary that they be mean; and do not come to put the awls too far outside of the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; and then cut the heads of the awls, so that they do not bleed the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes at the heads of the awls for them to hold, and leave them until the wound is sutured; and this manner of stitching with awls is more convenient in small wounds, because it suffices an awl or II in the second stitch. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back his intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he was well.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the seer had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicine; and I put some fine cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and washed it with water mixed with honey until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and put it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the heart in a straight line, lay the point on the place where you have stuck the needle, or sewed, and make it pierce from the other side, from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furrier does the furs, and that you leave the thread one time on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suture, as the Galicians say well, is like any fountain that brings together the two parts naturally, and attaches one chief to the other, in this manner: pierce an awl or needle close to the point of the suture, and feel the hole alone, and leave the two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside part to the inside, through the two ends of the suture; then pierce both sides from the outside part to the inside, with two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the most common manner of suture. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galians says this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than the other parts of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh in all its blood, just as the fire has moved it, so put back the intestine, and the coat; then put on powder with a healing char, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound bows; and stitch the thread, and be soldered the sifac, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to heal bowe, old cotton, and move it two times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and below the buttocks; and if it feels pain or rot in the bowels, which happens many times, then give enemas of black wine, and also if the rot comes to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the plantiness of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the rib jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become black, then you must tie the place that is black, that bleeding does not come there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two heads hanging from the side below the wound up to outside in order to align the extraction when the rib falls, and the wound bows.  
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured, and the wound is small, it may be restored in some men, for I have seen that a man was wounded or belly of a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was infected and became a fistula, and through it there was evacuation and flatulence; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to treat until he was healed, and his bowels were joined.  
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sutured, I doubted that the patient did not have pain in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and said certain experimentors that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take threads with large heads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it strains its mouth upwards; and then cut the head, and it stays so that it cannot untie, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely surrounded; and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief is heated in the intestine, and there comes no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine of a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that it be well cleaned, and then tie to the head of this thread the thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it in the rupture; and this manner of stitching of intestines is not more than according to the way of marriage and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, there is nothing but subtlety.  
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is healed and then bows inwards. 
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth a knotted false and white thing, where one feels no pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it appears clear, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times large; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the IX causes: namely, by the small amount of blood or body; or for its evil; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the wound is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and slow healing, and inflamed by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so forth that comes to the property of the principal member, and to the similar ones. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to where I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it known, so take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, so the query; and if the fistula is crooked, so the search with a subtle tent of cork, because the cork bends easily around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it by tents, so clisterize it through one of the openings, because the moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then query sagely in your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is chased deep into its way, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, so cope according to what I have told you, and remove the false parts and the corrupt matter that are inside; and then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep and straight place, so it is necessary that you cope deep into its way, as much as you can, then put moist tents in a medicine of water, and put them to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is laid at the bottom; and then put ointments of healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by these, so cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, so cope. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not harm or main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat the king as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then cure things with bandages until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns as before, know that you are not yet well done: if uncover and go as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place; and if it is thus healed, it is good. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not so, know that the corruption is too far gone, that you cannot fix it; if there is nothing else to do but let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, and do not leave even one; and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut through the moisture and flesh, and free the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place upon the wound something preventing decay, and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will have more easily the bones; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, leave only so much corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part corrupted, and comes right up to the marrow of the bone; it must be sored and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is joined; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example from it and help in your work.  
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was one young man around XXX years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg and he became swollen with a large abscess and there was no outward cause to open it; but the doctors through their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted much of the matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all lay bowed and moist from the body; and many doctors treated him for around II years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what flowed through the fistulas to great extent; and the young man's skin became red, and he had a yellow color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I probed a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore began, and scraped in one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inner bone; I saw what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had removed; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal; and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and considered myself able to close the place; but I could not do so until I scraped around a palm of the bone, and the piece was full of its entire width, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healthy and healed quickly, and no longer needed to be reopened except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed entirely, and there was born in place of the bone a hard cartilage, and he was of good disposition and had no nuisance nor contrary in all things, neither to go nor to come. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, it should be treated this way: take a thread, and strain it to the head of the bone that opens, and command someone that he extend it upward; and put another thread of wool thicker than the first thread, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you see it should be, that the skin does not bleed the flesh; and put a splint or a board under the bone to move the corrupted flesh; and it must be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and be treated another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the entire flesh; then put the stick below, and then tie it from one part to the other the corruption, and be the linen thread long as the corruption itself, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and tie the bone where it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else than to cut; and if the corruption is in the thumb of the hand, or in the thumb of the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opens for you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you; and know that the instrument and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their thinness, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to equip each kind of work its tool; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting. 
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can be affected by internal or external causes; and when you have medicines for that corrosion by the cure of the medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb until the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it had been burned by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; so hurry to cover it, and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the top of the arm, cover it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and all thus do when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes on a foot, cut the whole foot; and if it mounts to the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other way but to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or cauterizing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend some ministers one of the ligaments down, and others ministers the other ligament up, and you sever the flesh which is between the two ligaments at a spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or cauterize, and put on each side a cloth of linen, so that the cautery does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place carefully, or put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb wrapped in a strong bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you that it happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came into his big toe of his foot, until it consumed the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and a long time later the corrosion returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that were repulsive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, that he would die, because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have told this tale only for this reason, so that one may do otherwise, if one needs it. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; then it bursts and breaks through, and the pus pours out, just like blood vessels; and the skin which is above is as thin as delicate silk, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called “sain,” and is not called “fistula”; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone, then it is called “fistula”; and the skin is that you cut all around that skin, and even when it is thin, as delicate as silk; and does not hurt because of its corruption.  
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not yet in full force, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat with a clyster as follows: see if the breast is large, and the bow which is in it is of foul odor, then give a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take asafoetida, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them into a vessel over the fire, until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and clysterize the breast, and restrain the anus; and leave the medicine inside for II hours, then remove it by straining; do this many times, until the breast is purified, and the bad smell is removed; and once the clyster of water from ashes is used, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them, then filter it, and clysterize with it, as long as you know that the breast is well cleaned; and if the patient cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, then clysterize with water and honey, where there is a pinch of pounded litharge; or clysterize with honey and sweet wine, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and wine makes the flesh airy; and when you have done this, and you believe that the breast is well purified, then clysterize with that which produces flesh in it, and it is that you take diaphinit plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have said the properties or treated of ointments; and if the hole in the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter it, then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, as long as it is enlarged; and if the wound is too wide, then sew it up leaving only the place where the clyster can enter, and if the hole that gives off foul odor is above, then put the plug or lower down the part where it is.  
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in place, let no flesh get in the way; and if you cannot cover the breast as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow goes to the lowest point that it is, for when the bow is in place, let no flesh get in the way; and if you cannot cover the breast as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow goes gently downwards, and let nothing of the bow remain; and take medicines that consolidate to put on the wound, and stay upon the linen sheet that covers the whole wound; then cut as forces at the opening of the breast, a little wider than before; then place ointment under the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound to align the bow, and do not remove the large sheet for many days once; and the one who is on the opening of the breast, often removed to remove the bow, and know what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in such a manner, and you see the nature that jumps on the wound, know that the breasts are already closed, and approaching health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the chest does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, so do not despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and those who do the opposite; and if it hurts to be a chest after many days, know that the breasts do not heal well; and if the breasts take long to heal and are swollen, then apply medicines drying moist ones in substance and dry ones in virtue, such as diaphinit ointment, because there is much vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and the same is done better cooked honey, when diaphinit ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on honey when it is over the fire; and then glue it I drape, and put it over the breast, and sometimes administer one long aristolochia, and roots of celestial lilies, which are also like flour of roses and wormwood; and use of simples or composites: grind them, and make them into powder, and put them on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is too deep, and has made an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs; so the cure of the fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps in other places; and when it becomes inflamed, and one does not take care of it, then comes a purulent abscess, which spreads and spoils until it reaches the root of the fingernail, and perhaps all of it; and the corruption comes up to the bone, so that there is foul-smelling pain, and the limb is very swollen, and its color is inflamed.  
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut at it with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the joint, then cauterize the wound afterwards.  
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleed, then it is necessary that you put the root under the nail so that the flesh does not, and push it upward, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then you cut it and treat it well, because as much as the bone is corrupted, so it cannot heal; and if you see that it is about to corrupt, you cut it at an angle like it was said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is broken, and pushed, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first heal it. Then cut the angle of the spatula sharp by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it which soothes.  
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the hand's soreness
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is a part where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us of the two. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any kind of [joint] of the knee does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the knee, by chance moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint, he is grievous to cure; so you hold him to be covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or must at the end have a nout, it behooves you to first cut the flesh round about until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable shape for that, then cure it until it is sound. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swelling that comes to the two joints together comes from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from the burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut that suture so that the parts rejoin according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not join together; or you put between two pieces of fine wood, until the ends are joined, as it is fitting. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If soldering comes to none of its two with the palm, then cover that solder as it is fitting.
des vils	of villages  
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, that come in many parts of the body; and more often happen in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging with syrup, and then the healthy of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is to cut and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and draw it entirely. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this manner: first arise the leg with hot water very strong, until the large vein be softened, then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in I place, or II place, or III place, with a wide cut, then lift and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the patient can endure; and then tie it, and command him to stay with meat eating dark soup; and recommence the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are full, and hurt the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The elevation of the leg is done in this manner: place the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, then heat it by fire, and then cut the vein from above the knee to the foot, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with an incision, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when it is felt; and it can be seen red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; then put the point beneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it on the incision lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the point, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first; then cut another section, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut it at the heel, then raise and lift it until the second section; then extract from section to section, until it is all pulled out, then cut it; and if you cannot pull it up and lift it, then put a needle in the very strong double thread, and tie and lift it, and put it beneath the point, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, because if it cuts, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and there is harm to the patient; and when you have treated it entirely, place a wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound; and cure it until it is healed.  
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the sinew is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisting manner, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to strike the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein; and it is of a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and it may happen elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of rotting that comes under the skin, like it comes from inside the body, snakes and worms, lodged between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that in the leg there comes a very great inflammation, then it changes its color and the vein begins to burst forth, as the root of a plant. 
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from one and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it has any point to the fire, then wrap around the wood, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and bring abscesses and rot there, and bad illness; because for that thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the top, and leave nothing in the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated of the palms of long, or ten, and one time came to me, who had it from ten palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out the root, and pierces it to the bottom, so that all comes out; and be emptied the matter that is inside, and administer medicines at the place preventing rot any day, then cure it like abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein hands fail, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot or foot, and there comes much bleeding, and from which it leaps blood; treat then as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This sickness is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens many times to oxen, and it is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes all over the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the alert of limb to limb, as long as they touch the skin where it goes, and leaps further; and it is engendered by rot of some humors, such as come worms and serpents and lumbris and ascarides in the belly; and doubt one of its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him cured and treated, it is only possible to do so when he goes: therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut above and treat the furuncle, and if the pus comes out from deep in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dries; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain below him the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and treat the furuncle; and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of the body of medicines solutives for the humors carried out, and avoid eating meat that causes rot. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen those whom I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and a little after, I saw it rise as a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything else, as lively silver when it departs from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and went into the shoulder, and then a little after it corroded throughout the body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she felt it return around her body, as I saw.  
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed greatly how she moved so from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have wanted many that well had want to move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and exposed veins, and because of that appeared that constricted windiness; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this malady, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, so lie above and below gently, and then cut above until that constraint of windiness is out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, so cure him who displaces the windiness, such as fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.  
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are some which have large points, and small, and haired, and joined; and those which have II angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one which falls in any member falls according to II manners: or in principal member falls, such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestine, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you: then it is necessary that you desist from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.  
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the saliva is flung which is on the brain, is when there is a scotoma and a sudden and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; and perhaps without saliva from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and flung out of the wound moisture white seeming to pulses, and flung also like burnt flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then keep away from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the seventh moves like the hand, and brings dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: so know without doubt that death will come. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the seventh that does not move its root is that without pains of foam leaping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and throws great pain and great pain and sighing; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound any thing from the indigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it jumps a point of fiber through the intestinal road, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back spine and ribs and hips and legs, and similar members, are saved according to various provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do it in the same way.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to the man with an arrow that lodged in the root of his eye: I examined it, and pulled it out from another side under the fat of the ear, and it was healed without feeling. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And they treated one game with an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye below the paper below, and the arrow was replaced, and they could only reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was big as a Turkish bow, with all its iron light without ears; the game was healthy, and he did not have any bad accidents.  
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And treated an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and carefully until I removed it, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treat an arrow to a man, that it was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die; and then when he had passed XXX days, it did not change its disposition; I cut on the arrow, and  engulfed it, and treated the wound, and there was no bad accident. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man to whom an arrow has fallen or into his back, and the wound was sewn shut; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural positions, nor finds annoyance in any of its natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man, who had an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.  
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow to the prince's man, who was in mid-way between his bones, and was a little leaning on the right side; and the arrow was completely withdrawn I was called to the care after that it had been fallen three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.  
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it with a very subtle touch, and did not feel it at all; and he sensed prickling and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the splint on his hand for several days and closed the wound directly, and he kept it there for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his knee; and he told me this. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound corrosive medicine for several days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened in its place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly; and it remained well for four months, and then expanded so much that the wound that I put inside the pliers, and the mine on one side and the other, and could not issue; therefore I did not cease to subtly invent instruments, until I took one day the pliers well made, according to those whose form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I therefore restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed entirely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on those things which I do not say, for the books cannot fully comprehend; but the wise masters compare to a very small thing, and on those which are present and lacking, find new works, and new instruments, at the descending of strange things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are not in the limbs where they are fixed other than according to II manners: or by their place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is said to be through the place where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it is never seen again. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, leave it as long as the cartilage is swollen and inflamed; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it so for some days, and move it every day; and then it will jump, and if it does not jump, pierce around with a fine probe until the area around it is enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it until it is healed after several days, for if the arrow comes to the syvac, it is death.  
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come to the surface and remains with the patient for some days without bad accident, if the engine of the milk. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot be drawn out freely, then administer poultices as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body and it cannot be seen, so search the entire wound; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you can not because of the depth of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, so cut until the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if there are ears to which it holds in the wound, then remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can to draw it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, that you may pull it out more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then lay it until the place around it is softened, then treat it, because extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes it contrary, administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and guard against incisions to the nerve and the vein, and put anything how you can move the arrow without danger, whether soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do it, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees or feels nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place: cut therefore upwards, as much as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: if it has leaped now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it still and then begin the extraction again until it is drawn out; and if it were of the arrow, thrust it all the shaft; and if the shaft falls, and you see to administer a binding, then administer the instrument headfirst, so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push forward, and if the arrow is lodged, put the instrument headfirst again, in order to facilitate the extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it should be done.  
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or at the bladder or at the ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it up, if you cover it; and guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if it is necessary; and cure until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to treat arrows are similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the cutting point is like that of an owl's feather, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, so as it is shaped: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the pliers for putting and holding is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one gets well, of this it has or head XVI, that is to say: II batans that are after the ears, that are called the two «herbech»; and the II arteries that are in II temples appearing; and II veins that are in II tear ducts of the II eyes, that are called «aspires»; and the vein that is between the forehead; and the vein that is at the chief dou neis; and the II guindeges that are on the neck; and the II veins that are in lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called «augeherich»; and II veins that are under the tongue.  
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly drained in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one that is drained, which opens manifestly over the pouch.  
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the sap vein is the one that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two veins there; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one of them is below the bend of the pocket on the left side; and the second, which is called "sophene," is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "ness," which is at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bloodletting of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their places depending on the head: where then, to your right, and where you feel the pulse below your hip, so seize it; then take the lancet, and put it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to all of the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well two fingers thick through, and make blood flow out as much as you see; then tighten and bandage, until it is cured; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for ancient migraine, and sudden, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the body of tears sharp as the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeding is as I say: and is that the patient restrains his neck, so long as the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below your right; and then signs enche; then lifts the heart above the vein on your right index, and puts the lancet under, and raises the vein upward, and the cut, as you have done in other veins, and do cure of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right on the vein an hour, then put cotton; and then the lie form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them and their cutting and their extraction, as the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is as good as the bloodletting from the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, ancient headaches, and migraines, and for rubor; and its qualities are that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "furrow maker", whose form is: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip upon the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it is healed and never work one of a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not proper that the flames are too large; and to heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts so aids the eyes, and to the ear, and to the nose, and to the corner of the eye, and to diseases of the face; and the qualities of their blood is that the patient strains his neck by twisting with any linen as before; then the vein, and let it be the vein through, a point through the long through the flame a point wide, because there is no flesh.  
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fine, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for sores, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and boils that come in the face, even when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient constricts his neck, then strains his nose to your left hand, and takes a fine subtle long thread, and puts it in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin now to flow; and do not let it flow too deeply, and make flow blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the thread: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the II veins helps in the strengthening of the joints, and at the beginning of mesentery, and to many diseases, and to empties, and to corrodents, and to herpes, and estiomenes; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the sick man, and the sick man lying on the seat, then vein the long one a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary; then redo another part in the other vein, then untie the linen, and restrain both veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until the morning, that the wound be healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	Of the vein of the livers 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and sores and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: cut therefore both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and just as with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue so helps after the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is at the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bloodletting is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein: so let blood from both, and do not let it go too deep, because below are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut by which one commonly heals are healed according to II manners: or they prick at all I flame mirtin wide, or with a subtle olive like sharp trenchers, and it is called «anesil»; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and the fineness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins for blood flow of large apparent blood, and which contain large and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly; and it befits the surgeon that he bleeds wisely, and that he turns away from the artery which is underneath. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the ground and bleeding comes running, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and it must not be piercing flame, but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you must strain it, and change another; or you want any vein of it, or you open in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cut to the flame anesil, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is fitting that you extract the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with chalk, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flamed vessel; and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: avoid therefore. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protrude upwards like the urine of a child, and the skin is red and subtle, know that it is blood from an artery: hasten yourself then, and put your hand lengthwise on top, then remove your hand if the skin is tight, which often happens; if the arm is loose, leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be fearful, and do not move him until he is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it does not come out easily, and it pains you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and bind the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a rind of fig, and make it, and take one half and tie it well until the other day; if it without stinging, it is good; if no, cure it, as we have said, with powders that sting blood; and the stingers are not grieved in more dispositions for the small place of the wound, and the power of the ligature of the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle helps that she treats blood from the head above and from the body below, for this reason it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the healer to lay himself upon the nerve which is below, and if it is not too much pierced, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates and the saints are gripped, and by chance it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men for its subtlety, then it behooves you to vein it with the instrument anesil; and feel the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is fitting to bleed them pricked at the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have nerves nor arteries. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it does not matter if one fails the first time, and one begins again; and by chance, the joint swells in some people, when one fails the first time, but it does not matter.  
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is administered only to preserve health and to avoid diseases to come; and be the bloodletting made in one of the three veins that are or cuta: namely cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bloodlett in the beginning of priens a geun, and in autompne and in yver after meal, when the sign of repletion appear; and one must bloodlett the first day or the third, after II hours or III dou jor. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting that is administered to diseases has no determined hour, but when it is needed, in all hours and at all times; and it does not befit to bleed children until fourteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not blood let the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to bleed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary for them to cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have many phlegms held back, so that the veins do not attract superfluities from the intestines that are harmful to the principal members; nor should those who are too full of meats bleed, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are intoxicated, nor those who are dropsy-stricken; and it is worse to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of labor for women, and childbirth, and wakefulness, and fasting, and any that are all virtues, or by means of the weapon or of the body; then purify the humors if they are thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so; then go into a bath, if nothing forbids you, in order to purify the blood, and bleed from the vein on the side of the thigh, as we have said; and guard yourself on that day from labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be light and joyful, and let the person bleeding be higher than the one who is bleeding them, and rub the arm twice or three times, then tighten the ligature above the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot properly control the blood; and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell up, and you can feel them; then moisten the person bleeding’s skin with a little drop of old oil, then put his finger from his left hand on that vein below the point where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not escape or fail when pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that are like cords in the body, and some that are filled with windiness, so that when one puts a flame on them, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these; and if it opens the vein, it is the wound too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the veiners be advised in these things.  
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, begin again a little below where it was cut or above, if it is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the lump is swollen, and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days, and not bind the arm: perchance an abscess will come; nor enter into a bath, then begin again the bleeding if he pleases; and if the wound is small, or the vein short subtly and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening straight throughout; and work a bit carefully, thus that the lump be swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound inflamed, do not begin the bloodletting again, and put a little bit of oil cloth on it, because it closes the body of the blood and is more moist in this place than the oil; and thus administer the oil cloth in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and these same things are applied as a treatment and poultice for them, when it is put on the wound; so subtly the pain goes away and it separates when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there come some abscesses large, which happen many times, even when it is not drained except at the time where the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and in wine a bit hot, and hold it an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days no blackening or greenish color, it does not harm him; and if you see, put on any thing of aloes or myrrh brought back to juice of calamintha, monarda, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearances to the saint's basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore shun that you put on any of those things that we have said, for by adventure it comes short of the artery; but make i. plaster dry to harden the place, then cure it with other cure, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is fat and full, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him often and little, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is more useful than bleeding from a long or a wide vein.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, treat him with blood III times or IV. And if he is of a cold constitution, moisten before the bleeding moistened bread in mucilage syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pains at the vein, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use the other things which we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of vein.  
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body that is already exhausted, and it brings fever; so it behooves to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as long as it flows in pameson; then when you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his wrist when he is healthy, so that death does not come in the place of pameson, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it does not behoove when you see to untie his arm, and make blood flow the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm greatly, for this would be bad; but let him leave it until he heals the second time; or you do not point to the flame, as long as the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on top of the small amount of pus put back in place, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein of the arm is bled at the place of the vein of the neck because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of this vein is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red; then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well; then the incision is made now across, neither wide nor long; and let the punctures be wide, and let the incision be made well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot withdraw it, put his hand back in hot water, and leave the blood to run until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not return his hand to hot water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer; and this vein's incision is safer of all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the savior of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it works: restrain the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it completely through, it does not cause any harm; and do not go too deep into its depth, for the nerves are under all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and wool on the wound to soothe it, and do likewise for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood of him in the left hand is worth to the sickness of the mouse, and do all as I have said to you toward right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bloodletting of the spine is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the legs, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the hips, and thighs and old leg ailments, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his healing are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it purges, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot go many veins; heal therefore the one more wide, or at the ankle, than it is worth. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you vein it on the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are below, and cut through it as well as when cutting; and let the flame be annealed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot pull out [the vein] from it, put the foot in the water and leave the vein well open.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first incision needs to be made, begin the second one above a little, because the tissue is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the opposite foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the heel of the foot, and its incision relieves the pain in the hip when it is warm blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its vein are that the patient enters the bath, and is strained above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you cleanse it in all the ways that you can, and across; and it is better to move than to cut it, because the skin is dry, and it is very readily pulled apart by hand. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, so healthy any vein of him who opens or back of the foot, and toward the small thigh, and ward off the nerves; and make so much correction of blood that you see, and then untie the bond, and put cotton and restrain; she is now healed.  
des sainies de ventouse	of the wind suction 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or wood; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done with fire, it is according to two manners: or it is with all fire, or without fire; and cupping that is done by striking and by the extraction of blood, it is done in fourteen places of the body, so one is entirely in the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others in the two ribs of the neck; and the cup on under the chin; and the cup on the two shoulders; and the cup on the hips; and the cups between the two arms; and the cups on the two legs; and the cups on the two ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, but only of small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it weakens no one, as much as is done from a vein; and it should not be administered, whether with all fire or without fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to nosebleed, or by custom, we should introduce each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time; for there are such that, when they have need to bleed, they have a heavy head; and there are those who feel fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see by nut blood and corpses and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed in the month, we command to ventilate after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the vein helps with the heaviness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that this be done after the evacuation of the whole body; and this ventosation is in place of the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have phlegm, because it causes them great discomfort; and therefore, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have a cold disease in their head. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower because of the fear of obliviousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The inflation of the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is useful for the treatment of pleurisy, and for opening the channel of the diaphragm, and all wounds, and for repletion; and one should not blow too hard, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction or in the stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, and headache and migraine, and to strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healthy one that he expresses his hand to put, that he does not cut the artery, and does not come running of blood. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation below the chin is good for mouth sickness, and gum disease, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the arms are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins; and command the patient not to prick them too deeply, because the skin is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries below. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The sucking cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it should be big, and of iron, that it needs to well draw; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The sucking cups of the legs are used openly, because they draw blood from all parts of the body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the knees, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers; and they are placed in the place of two shins, and of two ankles, and nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in more dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the sucking cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and place it gently, and move it equally, and do not cease to do so, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the redness of the blood; then close it, and replace the cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are some who have fleshy flesh, and clear pores: therefore it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep hole; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to strike .ii. times: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, then it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to drain blood little by little, then we pierce only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we often return to it; and if the vein is thick, so make a good incision, and the end that the hairs are punctured firmly, and it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hard, and who have many pores, you oil their cupping cups with perfumed and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or seed oil of pumpkin; and if it is winter, of cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if to him whom one heals has tender skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil, but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.  
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, rise from ash, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or from their own water, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar; and it does not behoove to suck before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or II; and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is required that he be warmed, when he must be cupped and when he is cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard yourself if the one who is healed is choleric, and if their body is too hot and inflamed; so it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the meal, and similar things; and boiled beans, and veal broth, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mince pepper, and mint leaves, and small onions, and pigeons; and on the day that he will be bled, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men once triacle or musk before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the principal members; and it should be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot should drink it.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the chest and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their own, and one does it only in order to attract blood from limb to limb, such as we put on the breasts when the child is born; in order to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, such as we put suction cups on the belly and on the chest in order to reduce the limb; and remove the pain, when there is an inflammation or a stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or removes the stone from its place; and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water, such as in diseases of the pleurae, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water which has boiled herbs suitable for this. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the leech administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it II has two of large and half a palm from top to bottom, and it has or costal around the middle I small hole, as if to insert a needle, and be d’arain, souef before so that she does not bluece the patient when putting on the limb; and it has in the middle a rod across of iron or of iron, to put a candle enclosed, and be them large and small according to the maladies and the age of those who take them; for the suckers of the children are other than old people, and the thin ones that of fat.  
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus put this suction cup onto the limb: take the candle of wax or the linen cloth and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and its sides should be over the opening that we have said, so that when one wants, vapor goes into it, and one removes the suction cup; and take the linen cloth as before, and begin again often, if you need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered in diseases of pleurisy, on any sharp pain, it has no handle nor pointed end, and it is not administered except when it is full of blood, and it is placed upon the member so only; and this is its form. 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leechings are not applied except in members where one cannot place leeches because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar; and in the denuded flesh, such as two or three, and other similar parts; and the qualities of its use is that when you find leeches that are in clear sweet water without putting them on, take them; and put them in a nut in sweet water, until they are famished, and have nothing in their bellies; then be healthy with a vein and a suction cup, then rub the member so that it is red, and put the leeches on top; and when they will be full and swell, if it is the place where one can put a suction cup, put it there, because it is worth a lot after. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, lift the place with ease, then water, very well, and then tighten; and if the wounds heal too late after the body of the sinews, so soak the cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on top, until the sinew is stretched; and if the sinew is multiplied, so put on crushed vitriol, or gallstones, and similar things, as long as it is stretched; or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them there until they dry on the place, it will now stop; and if you need more of this, then take other sinews. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sutures do not want to be taken, so rub the place of fresh blood, or you put an awl there until the suture is pushed out, and then put them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will become firm; and when you see that they are falling, powder on a little bit of aloe and silk ground, or ash, so they will hold now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear reader, that the fool looks at this chapter and sees nothing like any old books, nor has he read any letter; and for this reason, knowledge is absent in our land, because I have never found any good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if any thing does not help him, as weakness of body, or child, or old; or if his limbs are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, namely cold drinks, and meat of lamb and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; so the patient returns to his first governance that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make thick nourishment, or there is viscosity, as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of beef, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment it recovers muscles and more quickly the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit do not heal well or weld according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone with the large tendons which are near and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and for that reason, you must nourish them with thick meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go inward, and others outward, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with fracture with wound, and fracture at all a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner has its engine, and its instrument proper in the restoration, according to what remembrance comes to its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by that which the bone is twisted, and appears well by outside, and hurts at the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torsion nor hurt at the touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture; but it can well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not need to move it with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes after, and then gently restrain it.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in a bow, and are the II parts disjointed, it is now necessary to put them in equal points, so that abscesses come from there; and if abscesses come there, let him leave them for no day, until the abscess is appeased; then put it equal to the movements that you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of the one which has pieces; then restraint, as it is necessary after.  
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in pieces, whether it be of the two parts, if it be hands or feet, or to the hand if it be a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and to the hand; and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the draw well and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor when turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except a little point, and it is necessary to put it in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain; and keep him that he be placed straight, so that tortuosity comes not when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.  
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap; then bind around light splints, III tours or IIII according to the limb, and strain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go to above the fracture and strain less, that the fracture then moves away a little the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you feel most of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and turn around directly above the broken part; then return to the lower part of the fracture, and strain it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first place above; then put between the bandages splints of linen or cloths, until they are all equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on it a soothing postil of pus, and that removes the swelling, and let it stay like that for several days; then place above your bandages, and be half the width of a cane's length well stitched, or from wood from which they make clubs, or from palm rain, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it is necessary for the limb of smallness or largeness; then constrain on the splints as you have done at the first hour, then tie above with a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; more strict it is above, less; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I want works from the fools who make their ties with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the tie cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not become that there be between each splint less than two fingers' width.  
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is annoyed by the stings of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy parts, then put under them pads of linen, or felt wool, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the break, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not behoove to bind all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put splints for after 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of abscesses appearing; and see here the manner of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and that you take flour that is held at the walls of the mill, and confit it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too bright nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, and even to women and to small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three parts each of honey, lard, and elecampane root, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mastic, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; and make it into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth much to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plasters that is good for torsions: take mugwort and wormwood, ana X III; myrrh and aloes, ana IX III; acacia VI III; Armenian bole X III, and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of  plastering to joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain occurring, and the use for fractures: take new linen, and moisten it in oil and boiled in water, and put it on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [it], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removing pain properly. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make a poultice that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground elder leaves, and grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of emplastering for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remaining pain of an abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marsh mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, one part each; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is frostbitten, boil it with moist coriander water, or water, and use. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of splinting more firm than the first, when an abscess hardened comes to the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mallow, and seeds of flax,  mallow, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Galen says in his book that on the broken member for restoration one should put a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little hot, as myrtle and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make a plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and henbane of men chopped, or feathers of owl, and viper's grass, and equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster with it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then you untie it a little after, and take care if the patient feels no pain, or if the bones have moved from their place; if not, do not untie it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the bandage now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of moist sea, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, half soaked in water or in rose oil, and tie on a nut, until you are sure that there is a hot abscess; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin again the subtle bandage, and a little bit of bandage, and do not restrain it as strongly as before; and bind it subtly until it is healed.  
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and the pain and swelling are all gone, and you need plaster and bandaging, then begin again, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb of those that we have said, then do not untie it except after III days or IIII or V or VII; and no time leave it XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the alignment of the bone together; afterwards restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I said before; and if you see it drying more than necessary, know that nourishments cannot come there; arose then with warm water, all times when you untie it, and let it be each third day, and moisten a bit the joint; by this work then shortens the nourishment in the limb, and mends quickly what foolish men do, who keep the limb twisted: this is bad, and so is the work dangerous, and I do not see anything else than to leave it and work directly. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of fractures are, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by percussion of sword, and the collarbone all the bone until syfac which is below the bone, as made haiche or fust; and for this reason this way of fracture is called «haichure». 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impact embedded, or splitting or of the neck of bone, or of the thigh on bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture passing, which approaches to the membrane which is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound which is rejoined in the bone as subtle as a hair, and is the fissure small, and for this is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound that is made either by striking of stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of the bone down, and is the lews heated like do the blacksmith when they fire on the cauldrons; so enters the piece within.  
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or whose bones are moist, such as a child's; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated from them like stars; and I will speak of them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the investigation at their ends, and by the corrupted cartilage that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of capillary blood vessels is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs on it, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of a fracture, be wary of accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of consciousness, and swelling, and numbness, and fever ague, and the eyes are watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then commence the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it behooves to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone may not be corrupted, and the accident that we have said come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part as follows: and it is that you prick the head of the sick person deeply, and uncover over the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more carefully than you can, and if blood flow comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess apply, if he needs help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with bandages moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess applied is appeased, and be assured of blood flow; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you cut in a narrow strip in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various types, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not crush the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must pierce it around it, so that you administer splints with chisels, not too deep so they do not pierce beyond the bone of the test, and it should have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several more, so that each one comes in its place of the breadth of the bone, so that you may have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one chisel on the bone, and turn to your two hands as much as you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel elsewhere a bit later, and so do all around, then cut with the chisels the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers, pincers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the syfac.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the instrument which is lodged in the bone to all other instruments similar to a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more tender and more subtle than the other scalpel; and if there remains anything of the small bones, or no scales, then carefully remove them with the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it very much, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, for that is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut in one direction and is the bone ague in two coasts, so that the trenching is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below; if it is attached to the bone, then gently remove the bone, because one removes it well without pain, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to carefully remove those asperities, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with large razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle bone fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to its direction; and this is something that is not fully repaid to one who has placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, that you do not hurt the ulcer, then administer by above another linen, and do not constrain it more than so much that it only holds the wound; and let it stay like this for a day or two, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of violets, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer other medicines without mordant; and watch that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment there, nor let it come together bowe, because when bowe comes together on the webbed membrane, it will corrode and fester, and bring great harm to the patient; for when one puts on the ulcer a mordant thing, it will blister by above. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take guard then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the black spot does not come out except through the medicine that has been put on it, which has virtue, then it is necessary for you to take a part of honey, and III parts of rose oil and in glue I drapel, and put it on the sore; then cure it in ways of cures as it is necessary, until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the nose are never broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or through the two, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and to the pouch outwards, until the two return according to their natural figure; and do this lightly, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot come to its place, then it befits you to put it equal at the head of a stick one piece thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of two parts, make another band, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or the tenth, when the abscess has calmed, then bind to the chief with two tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the lengths be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any restorer one must soak the tents in butter, and change each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the preparation of auburn of egg, and powder of mill; then leave the tent, as long as the bones are firm, and the cartilages hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts down goose feathers in place of tents, and so to 1 souef drape it around, and hold the scalpel and blow on the patient among; or do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the new while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in 1 pock of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, confited with egg yolk, then put light pads on top, and do not tie it nor the bandages; and if the break of bones is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then you will extract it with suitable instruments to that end, then sew the fracture, and the cure of things injanrans char, and suturing, as plasters and ointments suitable to that; and if inside there is no wound, then cure it with bandages, and put inside bundles of wool, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and is not broken in two, except for a slight inward bend, if one knows it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, you put your right index finger, and push the fracture inward gently, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth happens, or rupture, so restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on 1 double cloth; and put on the cloth a great star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so untie it on the third day, and then re-stitch what has changed; and put a plaster on top, of powdered flour with an abundance of egg or sesame meal, after which you have removed the cerote; and put on top a light cloth, and if the plasters harden, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a boil comes, so administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward so that no piece of the bone is removed; if subtle to remove it with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on one layer of plasters suitable for this, to prevent flesh from growing, until it is healed.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks many times in front, toward the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is so when the fracture is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken forcele; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each of the fracture to your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor disfigurement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be large according to your necessity; and hold and gently raise the forcele, and strain the sphere in your hand, so that you put each of the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder by force because it comes back in place, then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on his back and put under the shoulder one-half hour, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you cut above; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any mounting, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the shaft:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be also wide as it needs, according to the size of the bone and the force of the work; and have II heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the others narrow, as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the fracture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, so cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the abscess is hot there comes, so moist it. one drape in rose oil and in ash and in wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a spear under the saddle, if you have need; then take a very broad band of a palm wide, then put the doubled drape above the bandages, and the plaster; then take a small strip of three inches wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the neck, and under the healthy saddle, and under the diseased saddle; and tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the saddle, to raise the shoulder up; so will lighten the fracture of the arm by the raising of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until bad accidents come, until XX days; then renew the plaster, if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most at XXVIII days, and in less for some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates in the middle, and only through touching is it known; so arrange the device according to the figure of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put above a double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is even at any point of the shoulder, use that hair from lin bandages, so that the splint sits evenly; and then restrain it to a whole great bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the ligament every day; and whenever it softens, bind it, and put back the splint if it is out of place, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25, And when this number is completed, untie it, and be sure, because it is not a bone that easily moves. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and not under the heart, so do it above, and the bone, and make those things that we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens little; but it often breaks at the end.  
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in a limb, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and swelling, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and it feels well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one puts 1 cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders, and he brings together the sides of the 2 bones with his hands, and subtly does put it in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then puts bandages and poultices above the thin skin of salt, or some other light cloth, and wraps it in 1 cloth, and ties it over the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the tie around on the back, and tightens it well, and rewinds each hour the bandage, and if it softens, he tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unties it, and cleans what has come up in ways of cures; then puts back the bandage, and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are brittle; and one feels it well to the touch on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put the fracture even, as it is right.  
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the plaster, and restrain it with a splint, if you need one.  
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of ribs is sloping inwards, the patient feels very great pain and numbness, as well as shortness of breath, because the bone pierces the lung; and besides aches, and coughs and vomits a lot of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put a great deal of care into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to drive the pleurisy outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for boils if they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of us put suction cups on the place, in order to suck out strongly, and that seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not draw out superfluities to the place for the sake of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one must cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make it even on both sides, then be cured of the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that pierces the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to ward off the syfac; and then one must saw through the bone, and gently draw it out, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on it soft cloths in rose oil, and put them on top; and treat while the place of the abscess is covered, and lie down so that he rests on his side where it should be, as long as it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that they bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.  
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many positions, and if they move and feel good when pulled and held, know that the articulation of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if care is put into it.  
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take heed if the legs are softened, and if the accident is that which is in hands, and on the back there is windiness and ejection without will; and when it is supported on its belly, there is ejection without will.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is set on its back and it wants to sit down, it cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if you do not labor in its cure.  
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk of one egg, as long as it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a linen band, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover the joint with wool; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure with ointment that promotes flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the cow," put your fist of your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand on your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do so again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Few things happen that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, then there would not have been a little bit of lessening to the top; and making long, and declining to the sides, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and prickling, and swells what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over, as long as you are over the fracture; and know what are the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, then put equal that fracture, as long as it is to a natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make gesture the patient on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it equal, place it on the plaster, then place a splint of wood or of heart, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs, until the ligament is equalized.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy rib, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses come to them, do not touch them, until the abscess has been appeased, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is proper, if there are no bad accidents; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The helper is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick plain of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads two cords, and bend them upward, and seat the patient on one seat; then place the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and has in the middle a curve of stick, then put on top any heavy thing or the ministers extend it down; then put the splints the fracture even to its hands together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture to its hands, and the other holds below at all one line, and extend each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more far, restrain the linen under the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part.  
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one linen strip beneath the armpit, and the other toward the outside, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is toward the outside, it is necessary to put the linen strip lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and outside; then set the fracture as it should be, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not restrain it until vii days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in oil of roses, as long as the abscess is appeased; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint above the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of stars, if nothing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint ii of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture iii times on each side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it to be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days at the bandage, that prickling or swelling does not come to the place, or that suppuration cannot come to the limb for this reason that it is too much estranged. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.  
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none such accidents come, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of wool equally, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the ligaments; if it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before set out, in such a manner that the food be at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the arm and leg should be taken up in forty days after all; and then one must unbind them and administer baths and ointments for the place to heal. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and tangled, it remains to untie for one day or two months. 
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fossil», because one is small, and it is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the small one; perhaps breaks the great fossil alone, or the small one, and perhaps andui together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made even. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large furrow, then it must be pulled more strongly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other ones, and let the patient be crossed on him himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers to his arm to the part below his hand, or to the linen, and one other minister to the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors even, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any severed that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a support on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses arise, then glue a cloth drape made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the drape carefully on top, until the abscesses are appeased.  
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the surgeon removes the cerote and puts the mold powder with abundance of egg, then places the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more further outside, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have VI splints or arms in more dispositions: either the fracture is in one of the bones, either in II; and restrain more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less distancing, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the splint be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after several days.  
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and let the member not be allowed to rest.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begins tightening again, and if the ligaments are torn and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then address it. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the dressings cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it, that is, a little, and leave so for some days, until the dressings correct, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen him until 20 days.  
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or whoever is injured, then he puts his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two there are few fractures, and there comes but only many times a sprain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed-legged, and be straight before him as well; then put his hand upon the board outstretched, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and place them aligned with the mirrors, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be enveloped in .i. linen drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the base near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and be the splint of  wood as wide as the palm of the hand, and restrain it, as it behooveth.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the link between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to either of the two lower arms, if it is the elbow, set it straight as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other arm, such as in the index finger or any of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy one that is next to it; or you tie them all together in .i. holding, which is best, or put a splint on top, like an elbow; and take care in the restoration and in the arrangement of the hot and dry abscess, and treat what comes up, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus one above the fracture, and one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each minister his limb equally; and this is when the fracture is amidst the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one bandage should be towards the groin, and the other bandage below the fracture.  
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then be the ligaments below the knee, and be the extension down; then place the hands on the bone even with its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if an abscess does not come. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it be soothed then return to your work and your cure; the ligature is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a strong bandage doubled in II or III, and leave any superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the head of the thread go upwards; then turn up the leg and the hip with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip of fabrics soft to put equal tightness, then begin to tie firmly III or IIII above the fracture; and as you go higher up above the fracture, and less tighten it; then tie onto the II joints of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind III splints that are above, then rise back down to the head of the thread, until you come to the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes no abscess nor swelling or any other similar thing. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, so untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no times is broken the hip thus if one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration thus made does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip joint is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the rut of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there are few fractures, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is no longer than a crack, or opening, and it happens to every wound, and without wound, and this is well known. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is thus done by putting equal those things which are rounded to their two sides, as long as they can be assembled and moved, then put the splint on it, and put a round piece of wood on top if needed, and restrain it as is fitting, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as a hot poultice and similar things; for each accident apply what is suitable to it until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and there happens to every part breakage as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns downwards.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its strength. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take .ij. bandages of wool that encircle the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in .ij. layers .i. bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or to the left, and thus is well; and none administer .i. splint of wool along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly this is done in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so care for it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but of the bones of the foot comes never a fracture and to two points, and there is not happened further than in more situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient on their foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 fingers wide, then restrain the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped bandages and other things which you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they were broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said of the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one pock more wide, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and strain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in .i. piece of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it stand upon the top of the table far from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other breaks, since we have said; and secure each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female nature is broken, make her sit with her hips enlarged, then incline her to the back part, and hold her there; then fill the basin of the woman's nature with cotton, and put as much in as a stomach; then turn the woman over, and lift her back up and down, and then bounce the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stomach; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for VII days or so: thus will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie one end to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the end that is formed, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; and are not hidden these fractures near to him who puts his study and his use, and attends my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	Because the fracture signifies to more arrangements the right way of restoration then thus.  
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the phallus; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said witness it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, so keep the vitriol dressing, if you have no other thing, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess does come to it, so let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would make a bad accident happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on top of the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it in place gently with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions is not fitted for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has .vii. or .viii.  of long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the smith embeds .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb in your work, and let it be thicker in front and gradually thinner towards the end, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called “palainche”, because the head of the bone should be put on the top of the visible bone; and it is pushed once, until it returns, and it be equal to each other.  
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it behoves you to chip away at the head of the bone until the instruments have hold. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, such as a scalpel or awl, to your power; then clean what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If he does so until it is in its place, then moisten the drape with black astringent wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put on the wound any cerote nor anything else where there is oil, that it may not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and warn yourself well that the wound not be strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish people done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more slack than other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come about, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it does not behoove to put on dressings; but wrap around, instead of dressings, hard cloths, and tie them.  
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound swells, then remove those which you have placed upon it and put healing ointment on wounds, such as ointment tetraformation and similar ones. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the member two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it be sound and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be set apart in such a manner that the bone aligns gently below.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if each day passes, and it cannot heal but returns to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone; therefore it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent and remove all these loose pieces which cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, do not treat it, because many times death results, but leave it until it may rot; perhaps it will knit together after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.  
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see is the figure of the limb; and perhaps he cannot make the limb its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if he administers medicines stichtics as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, as you choose any of these things, or all together, and mix them with stichic wine or with the white of egg or with oil; and place them on the wound in poultices, and hold it well, and do not loosen it by hand for a day; and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is gone; or you strain on a piece of well-made plank; because the property of wood is that it removes all the swelling from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and there is need to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you reapply it to any razor until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and afterward the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and not properly tied as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or from too much irritation; or from too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed the patient well, and make his body soft, until the blood multiplies within him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and lightness; then place poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often subsides with water dressings, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of the member twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and the torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and honeywort, and similar things; and make 1. a softening plaster, such as diacylon well made, and you take the marshmallow muslin, and confit it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig fat, and grind them with flaxseed, and medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with moist hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement to the limb every hour.  
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is ingrained and hardened, as stone, and needs to be removed by iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incisor; and put care and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is from a joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it should now be brought back without a splint.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, then the limb swells and perhaps when it is reset on its place. For this reason it does not behoove one to move it in the hour that it is swollen; many times it brings forth suppuration and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, it makes the patient bleed, then lets him, until the abscesses are all calmed; then applies the limb with warm water and oil, then moves it lightly, and cares for each member as the wound comes in its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit out of their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and close the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and encloses his tongue with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by more than one disposition.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset it carefully, and do not boast; and in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other two hands be outside, to put straight; and command the patient that he soften them, his jaws, and move them in every direction. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the minister places it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back and hurts, even if they are the two mandibles together, then apply hot water and oil, as long as they gently reset; do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with softened wool, it is placed on soft cloths in a collar made of rose oil and wax, then it is tied gently with light bindings; and the patient sleeps on his back, and his jaws are between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to yawn, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are healed; and then eats what he wants lightly, and does not work hard to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jawbone is well healed and sound. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed sweats come, and by chance a solution of belly, and by chance vomit pure.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these things, then know that it is perilous; and many times die those who have them within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fracture cannot dislocate from the side within the continuation of it and of the hip, and it is dislocated no time to the outside, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies flat on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put upon the splint and bandage, and restrain it; and the head which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if perhaps, and if it dislocates any time, you reset it to its place, as we have said; then put upon the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient that he rest until he be healed; and in the same way is brought back the head of the shoulder, when it is out of its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only III manners: of which one is that it is dislocated to the part of the seat towards below; and the second is to the part of the breast; and perhaps dislocated to the upper part, and this happens little; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated down toward the seat, especially in those who have little flesh, because to these it was moved quickly; to those who have enough flesh, it is moved with difficulty, and returns with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it carefully until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known the dislocations when it is pulled down toward the seat, and puts difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the seat touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were ones; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, nor move from any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly in touching; and this manner of dislocation is not merely brought back, when it is new, or if the child is ill. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their fists under the seat, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so they will come gradually.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterward, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer him a softening and soothing ointment, such as decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered; then lie the patient on his back, and put under the seat a pad of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of his leg on the pad, and raise the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the hand of the sick person; and another minister holds the head of the sick person so that it does not move down; thus the shoulder returns now all at once, and if you see it, reset it according to this manner: and let it be that you make the man present who is greater than the sick person; and let him be straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the sick person, and lift the seat up high so that the sick person hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can lift with him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.  
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And reset it also in another manner: and is it a long stick in the earth, where the head is as well as the bedpost, and is neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the sick man, but that he has blankets above, and the sick man be standing on the long of the staff; then it is extended his hand down on the other side formed, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if she does not want to come back for all these things that we have said, so do this cure: take a stick from the two arms of great and four times as wide, which has the head well-rounded to enter into through the armpit, according to this form:  
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie above the head of the staff bandages underneath, so that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it under the saddle of the patient; and extend his arm on the long end of the staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on one rung of a ladder of the wide, and be extended the hands down, and let the body hang down on the other side: now the joint will return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner that it is, it is necessary that you put under the saddle a ball of wool even, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of an egg, on the whole shoulder and around it, then strain it under the saddle arrangement, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he should not move much, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then move more after .v. days or .vij., and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it behooves you to administer cautery in three perforations, as it is placed before or chapter of cauteries. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the hips, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and care until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient to bathe many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in different ways, and returns in different ways; and it has been dislocated from all sides, even front and back, and the dislocation is not well set, because one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the blade diseased with the healthy one, if he can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.  
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus as the pus comes out of it, because if the pus did not come out, it would be painful to reset it; and perhaps it cannot be reset entirely in every way, even when it is behind; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and let its arms be spread, and the hands hold towards the cutting edge, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and firming the root of the palm the cutting edge which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when the hand touches the joint with its hand, it puts oil of any kind to soften the joint, then push the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with egg yolk, and hold it firmly, and lay the arm on the neck of the sick person, and leave it for several days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint is not well set, begin again with the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe him well and rub him, and press until he is eased; or you place on the joint a wool fleece fat, then leave it one day and night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the fleece, and then enter the bath; and so do II times or III, until he is healed; and if you see, put on a fleece of moistened warm rush with butter, and strain it over; it will return to its place.  
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell, or that an abscess comes hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the putting back in is that you put the sick hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mine he puts it equal, so that it puts its palm upon the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it comes back all way; then it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; and then put the sick person's back of his hand upon a table at the extension and putting back. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, the patient puts the back of their hand on the table, and the physician puts their hand on the appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint remains twisted; and does not harm anything to the patient except that while the hand is weakened, and cannot constrain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; so there is no other means except to constrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is no other thing.   
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then tighten it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then bathe it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No times are dislocated the knuckles of the hand on each side, no times on the back of the palm or on the belly; therefore is the knuckle and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the knuckle, and the pen towards the part where it is disjointed; and let it II days, and then put it equal that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and the untie of day, and make it move, and the tie again; and do this often, until it be straight, and also do so, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it be healed; and also do so, when it is dislocated elsewhere.  
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the bones jump out without will, and cannot be held, and many times they become softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one. And many times the leg moves in four parts; the one which moves to the back is called "gilbositez": the cure of this is that you return it if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falls or blows or similar things, the ancients said there are ways of cures by great words, where there is not in all much profit; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.  
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the glibosity that comes to the chest before, there is nothing nor sensation; and also that which comes straight on II sides, and one cannot cure except that one properly that comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be extended upon his face in I place even, and have restraint under him, so that he does not move; then stick I tinder at the head in earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen from below the shoulders of the sick person, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers take hold of the ties, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the II tinders; and let them be well closed, the tinder as we have said, and the mire puts his palms upon the spine forming, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arm lengths long, and place it under the shoulder, and have the patient be on his side, and put the head of the board under the shoulder, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the legs of the patient on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same to the turn that turns by hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is that you put two sticks in the chief of the sick man's arm from a great one, and toward the feet the others, and have between each stick, up and down, a palm of space long; and have in each stick one hole, where the turner runs, and let the sticks be firmly in earth, so that they do not move; and between each two sticks have one turning stick, for which the linen turns, and have in two turnings two small sticks of a palm long, for to turn the turner; and then tie the linen which is among the assles to the turner toward the chief, and the other linen toward the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner to all the linen, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, place a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white upon it, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers long, that  covers the site of the gibbosity and the side of the healthy spine, then bind it with a linen bandage, as we have said, and use the patient to a subtle nourishment, until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank, and sometimes it appears in the back bone of the spine, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so for this reason one must not have presumption: by chance would come death.   
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and not like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and poc dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend his knee at all; and is the leus which is below swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the hip comes there.   
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to fever, so this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens in front, so are they well his leg according to accomplishment; nevertheless, do not double knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, so he cannot spread his knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the hip joint at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this appearance of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no cure; and it is not convenient that he has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocations, so you haste that you return the joint, and the extension within and without, and the movement to right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you appear as minister strong, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or to the linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand upwards in such a manner that he pushes his hands downwards under his armpits, then tightens a linen band on the hip; and another holds the head of the leg; and extend up and down all at once, so that the patient be lifted from the ground at one time, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not done, it is necessary to pay attention to its appearance When the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then raise the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength; then take other ministers to his arms, and embrace the large place of the hip which is diseased, and extend it outwards in this way: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let it be suspended by the head on a pole, and be two arms' length above the ground; then command the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers hold the patient, who embrace firmly the hip, because the joint now returns easily. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has stiffness, and restrain the limb on the bad leg properly, and on the hip too; then put two sticks, one at the top and one at the foot, then stick one stick between the thighs of the patient in the form; and lay a plant of damp cloths around, that it will not chill the bad limb, then extend each minister towards him, and the mire puts equal to his hand the dislocation.  
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a table, that is, and press it as we have said in the book of surgery, and let the patient lie on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put his pain on the front of the diseased limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the hip, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down, nor raise him up on the ground, but it is necessary that he be as if his hip were dislocated outward, as we have said concerning childbirth on the two hips; and let him be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint to the table; and will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; therefore adjust the hips, and put the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest III days or IV, then untie it, and put the splint on; and if you see that they are equal, strain it, as before, and leave it III days; then untie it, and allow him to walk well, until the limb is strengthened. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not rest at his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg as far as he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests lightly at his hip; and put the plaster on, and make the leg rest at the hip, and tie them together firmly for three days or four, then untie; and do not let the patient work, as long as the limb is fortified. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed. 
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes bruised, and sometimes dislocated completely, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated: the resetting is light, and one must extend it lightly with his hands when it is felt only.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him by the legs, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then upward, and put the foot well up; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the ground between his hips, and tie bandages around him so that he does not bleed; then hold the patient's hip with one minister, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the ligature, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the stick should be well between the hips of the patient to hold him when we are stretching him; then put the fingers of each minister on the dislocation with their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return readily. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set in place, put the plaster and dressing over it, and strain it firmly, and tie its foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, that the ligature be not too tight; then let him stay for II days or III, and if the ligature softens, tighten it; then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for IIII days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and this is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his flat place or on a table straight, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it comes back; and when it is equalized, and there is nothing open, then put under the sole of the foot a board at the head, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is desired to restore it, many times the patient dies; so be not presumptuous in its cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor bold; and use at the beginning of things soothing poultices, hot ones, and let the patient be in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the boil may come to it again; and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing poultices, hot ones, and cure the wound as it is necessary, with dried dressings; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are broken, set them, and do what has been said for simple ailments; and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you death according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and of your body. 
Amen	Amen 
