O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for that reason the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all things, so is the science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will make it come alive together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as much as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our times, is the art of medicine lengthened.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who intervenes in it to mount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and the separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that what is good with the name is bad, and with the deed it is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, should beware so they do not fall into error and harm people; just as I have seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a fool who cut, that is to say, an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's body, and the stone was large; so he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another mire who took care of .i. duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant mirs strained the fracture over the wound as stars by very tight ligature, and did not leave any xalain on the wound, and left him thus; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained so that the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I loosened it so it was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the members were totally lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see i. another wound which would burst i. abscess and then inflamed by the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not need one to touch it with iron if it's not in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, my dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, one where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For which it is necessary that you be careful so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you want to be called foolish." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the shapes of the instruments, and of the cautery irons, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it behooves me to say the quality of help and of the annoyance of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and of annoyance are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret answers; and of this many wise men speak and agree to this; and I suffice myself with their words, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for .ij. complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion combined matter, some say that cauterization is great help; and others say the contrary: that cauterization is not good for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured of a hot malady by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cauterization does great help to a hot and dry malady that comes in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, do not intervene except he who has proven it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the events and spacing of times; we have no more fear of other complexions, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and it does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from member to another in removing, and bring to the member maladies of grief healing; and by adventure kills the patient The fire for his height and for the goodness of his substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says when he demonstrates; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time cauteries should be made, and by whom they are to be applied.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms occurring are lessened with the help of cautery; and also if the cautery is for necessary pains before and until they cannot wait for the time when greater evil will come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not ever think as fools do; because the sickness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not merely medicine that alters complexion, and dries up the humors which are cause of pain, but it is better than medicine for the hastiness of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a certain thing is that the sickness comes at times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and they are assembled in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as for example cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears clearly that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the leus of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And all the way when you heat a tool of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools down so quickly; and if one heats it too much; they do it to the fire; and so there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made apparent in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head just to the feet, for that the way may be lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds made because of a sickness called “soda,” and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all maladies that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine solution, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtue and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then raise the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crosswise between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; after, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two mediums come, if it bleeds then exhaust the cautery that is called “olivare,” because this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand up and down turning; then gently lift your hand, and look at the place if you see the bone that is, to say a small one; and if you do not see it, so begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take one peck of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days; after put on soft cloth in butter; and let it stay until the burn is removed; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called “tetrafarmaçon”, until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the ancients, that when more time the wound remains open, more it purges; and for that reason so they aid moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said any of these that one must leave the cautery so much that part of the bone be burned, and then reset what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other one must leave the cautery thus long, and thrust it so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their spindles for which the humors are carried out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that one must clean and dress.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more saving and quicker for me, and of this use I work in such a way together with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take ward if the shoulder of the sick is of a strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery one point as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the shoulder up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there is one in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the sick feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the shoulder, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it spreads to the eye, and the patient is purged with medicines cooling, and one has done all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of hot medicine are such that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it  one piece as two fingers, and then put it on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed there, tie it and hold it well and leave it so for twelve hours; and then untie it and scrape away the garlic slice, and leave the wound so for two or three days; then put on top cotton dipped in butter as long as it covers it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment cure as long as it is healed; and if you see this done of some burning medicines that I have written or do in the tenth treatise of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done this way. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of this form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail, having i. one point of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and tremble the fire lightly, until half the thickness of the heart be burned; and raise your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and there runs an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened with butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at all its point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn’t profit, and you see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron don't help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it be white; and then rule so on the place desired a line of half a finger long, and withdraw your hand once, and strain that you not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; and guard the jaw that it stays quiet when one moves it, and the nerve doesn't feel but that it is quiet and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against dripping of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know it, and who isn’t studying and experienced; and leave the work in mid-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it happens.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has 2 blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then take this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After point all around the ear of the sick one, or around the two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn; and have ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cautery is not far from those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make cautery to the appearances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of eyes and expulsions of head and gargles, and these are not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery to the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as one finger's breadth; and leave the cautery so long as half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the semblance of the cutter that we have put in front, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit bigger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; afterwards re-rub the head of the patient well, and place on the nape of his neck a plaster of mustard as it is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy thus, good is it; and if he is not, then to him do three cautery make of the middle of his head descending until the neck, and have a space between each cautery two of broad; and cure it as the others, and if thou see him join, and the patient is suffering, then to him do one cautery in the midst; and if needs be, two others upon the two horns, and cure it until it be healthy; and let the cauteries which are called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It befits that the head be purified of herbs and of those which we have said before; after this anoint the head of the patient, then make cautery in the middle of the head and upon each horn, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if thou hast more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far advanced, then to him make four cauteries upon the spine of the back; and let him remain until the most of the heart be burned, and gently lift your hand; after this cure it until it be healthy, and let the cauteries which are called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use a fiery cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from severe medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargles and chewing modifying the brain often with well-cooked meats; after, place the hair on the head in the middle, and make 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cauteries like I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the humidities corrupted and phlegm gross, then the cautery of those cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and is the body of the sick moist, then he gives to drink something by which the brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raise the head of the sick man; after make one torteil of flax well made, as well as one circle, so he put it in between the head; and the sick man sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and is worth mews of ram's butter ancient; and the heat to fire temperately, so that the two if he puts him the can suffer; after empty the circle by within the head, and let it cool; and make this to the sick man each week once with another good government, until he be healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see them cauterized, make more points all over the cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts above cotton moistened in butter and fat of swine.  
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give to the patient something purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After [you command him] to raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the awe is to the 2 eyes together, or on one if the descent is in one; and cut with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off decorrement of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, so restrain it as well as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how you will stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or a heater under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the sides of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of this awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removes the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or heaters under the 2 bones; and if there is need for more, one cauterizes sagely above the eyebrow with each small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the sides of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nutshells to drink; after which, touch his head, and make a cautery in the middle or with olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the two sides, one under the cheekbones; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by sickness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called «olivare». 
de coi ci est li forme:	of what this is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the parchment, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your good health; after mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign next to the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and  muscillage of parsley on the eye, then heat up the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the skin be burned in that place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave so for .iij. days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after those the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are few, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one 1/3, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyes of the paper; and if the patient holds in 1 eye only, so must one operate in 1, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg wine; and the head of the patient be in your healthy and put your hand showing above the medicine, and press 1 peck and the muzzle every time that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels it as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, so remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medication will have passed, lift the place of the wound, and reward yourself if you see the paper raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not so, then again put the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set; then put moist cotton in butter until the burned skin is healed, after cure the place of the ointment that is called "dyafenis" and another, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that it does not fall from the eyes of the medicine. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that part which is softened by the parchment properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not be returned the right way to him whose is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy hand; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after putting moistened cotton in an egg white or in parsley juice on the eye; after heating the cautery which is as: and place it on the head as the shape of a goose feather, along with which the cautery should be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, also as a tent; but all the same, this which is placed is valuable for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the corruption, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate, and drain out the bowel; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and the corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not work, restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.  
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to a fistula, and cut its place; afterwards put into the opening a small camphor of this form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And it is made to the quantity of 3 of a plum; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and let the patient not move at all, that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine of figs or in honey: the lead so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not so, then it is necessary to administer a purge to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to how it should be in its proper place. 
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times occur cracks in the lips that are called "hair," and also on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these cracks as we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then cauterize i. small scalpel cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it carefully into those crevices until it comes to the end; after which care the place with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made rot and swelling and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it is necessary that you have 1 cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after which you burn or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heats at its end; and do this once or twice; after which care for what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if that does not happen, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your book.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after sharpen the cautery whose form will come here afterwards in such a manner that you put a canine on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot immediately, and hold as long as the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the sick person's mouth with salt water, and let it stay for an hour and spit out forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dry.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not worth, then there is need for cautery according to .ij. manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of wax, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelop it on the point of a needle, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and so do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see such moistened wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron as long as the heat comes to the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery with fire is like this that you seize a staff of iron or steel, and be it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick; after you heat the cautery, for its form will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be taken away the same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then the root must be driven; and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cautery of wherever you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the cauterizing iron.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron as it comes after this form, and let it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days; and place wet cotton in butter as long as the burn is gone; after cure the place of ointment and tents until it is healed.   
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the throat, and also when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; after that you make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come even up to the throat, and burn only as much as one point.  
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the previous cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery which is called 'clavicle' be as we have shown before; and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	of the thrust
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and sickness of the body are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dry skin, and the illness is ancient, if you make two cautery wounds on the shoulder in their places; and one other cautery wound between the two breasts; and be the cautery which is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cautery in pricking to all the cautery that is called "point" because its form is as before in the illness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or until it hurts. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at III rains according to this form. 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for that reason these are the cauteries lighter, because you make them in three parts.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, be so kind to the patient on his back and on his rib cage; after lift the heart which is inside the tittle to the sides of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then cauterize with .ij. ners  of which this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib cage, and comes out the figure of the cautery altogether .iiij. cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, because the figure of cauterization are sis cauteries; and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted on this, namely the nerve for which there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery porous ground with a seal; after make rest the patient, and let not the members be moved for long time until he is well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thickness of the collarbone or many cauteries when pricking.  
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it is harmful to his complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and are manners of cures accustomed and he does not profit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and arms. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this then I make III cauteries I under the shoulder blade of the side for the quantity of an egg, to all the collarbone cautery, and II cauteries over the II ribs as long as the figure of the cauteries is at III angles, and have such space between one another that they are not joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they prick the II parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and seizing on the stomach there. point according to the quantity that you see of it increase; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "point".  
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is moved out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those that we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, then it is necessary that the patient be soothed on his bed; and sign of the third cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the side of man comes; and have a space between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be long in the body, and do not press your hand too hard on the whole cautery; and let it burn only half the heart, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish so, cauterize these cautery with the curette, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and that it does not come to boil, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and you know it.  
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has an abscess at the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he feels pain more intensely. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is pleasing the patient, it is necessary that the sick person be soothed on his head; and then hold with a finger where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the ray, because of this is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the kernels are burned, and come to syphons, as long as the pustule is entirely dry; after the cure according to the cure of the suppurations as long as it is healed; and it is not right that of this cautery use any besides those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured some time. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, he may boldly work, and in every way it seems to me better to leave him 
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must do to pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the biggest that you will be able to find, and whether it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the forcele and the neck, and two small cauteries a little down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining behind a little; and one cautery under the breastbone, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the two ribs of the breast from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that some ancient one used cautery of fire like a razor and heated it and put it between the ribs until it came to the abscess; and out comes the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed. 
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse of what we have said in the divisions of the treatments, and it does not help, then there are three kinds of cauteries that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which some manner is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back; and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is at the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two nerves on fire until the kernels are pierced from the other side, and then removes the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, then cauterize with the whole cautery to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth moving than the other cures before said. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterizing is not good for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make IIII cauteries around the head, and I on the stomach, and one on the liver, and I on the spleen, and II behind the back on the spine, and I in the middle of the breast; and let the cauteries be near the heart.  
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery uncovered for to fight putrefaction long time, and do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have before shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of a we citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much by the font, so tightly close the outer edge of the awl, and let the cautery be according to this form. 
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the curette; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may rise in them; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When belly solution comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine is weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering much and of great virtue, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, to the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle, at each cautery a subtle cleaver, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the base, or one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, which is all outside almecate poc and poc by triangulating, and I cautery below the mound II does; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one does I great cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and I other on the liver, and I other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cure the place until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the "thelul," sharpen the cautery which seems like i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on that "thelul"  cut; and let it there as long as the cauteries reach the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not clot; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments beneficial until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the "alchatim," it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will relate in its place, such a malady comes that it can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula, and is filled and full of rottenness and corrupt moisture, then it does well to quickly provide a fine tent, and guard that you know at all the tent how much it has in circumference. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cautery which seems to be the razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that it tested was entered, and restart the cautery until the flesh and corrupt are burned, once, or II or III, according to the quantity of the need; and guard against hurting the nerves which are inside, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those fuers than in the fleshy place, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place until it is healed, and if the places are saielez, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the place is healed entirely; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is false, and corrupted the bone at the root; and so as one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes as rains, and of great windiness, and does not take much of a woman, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our finger; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be clavicle according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for those to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the bud, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be clavil, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found the level of the viscus department, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone be inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as the one with which the stomach was cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, make .iij. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and cure it until it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say together medicines burning, and cautery of fire. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is as follows: that you cauterize on the bone of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and large, and there be between each cautery a space the size of a digit, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for which reason there are IIII according to this form:  
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see it, cauterize it with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, on the left side a little; and whether the cautery is made with a curette or burnt with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize it where he feels the pain three fingers or four at the cautery called "finger".  
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the pointed or circular cautery; and well guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so much that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do no more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted the whole foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly ache of which he had death. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.  
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, for this is the manner, make such iron and be at the chief as big as a nail of finger, or a little less, and be between entanglements and be from one entanglement to the other by spacing the quantity of a node of fist; and be the entanglements on two parts, and be also like nuts, and there is in the hip of iron well made; and this is the form:  
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and feel its heat, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery return and leave it three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning are so that you make the instrument in a  rectangle as it descends on the edge of the door, and be of iron or steel to one side long, and in the height have II noses, and have between each the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be open outward and upward, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the bolster of the hip upon the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand strongly upon the bolster of the hip; after put between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated in the fire one point, and let him for an hour of the time, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found moderation also with fire; and when the moderation is passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the hip away gently, and leave thus III days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scald is removed; and leave it III days that rot may extract itself; and this would be the last aid after the cure of wounds as long as it is sound. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds it down according to what you have done in the hip augmentation; and this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it or treated it in the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole in the fire, so that the point of a razor can enter; and put one pot on top of the other well closed, and put alkali and salt and honey on top, as long as there is the right amount of powder on top until you have taken it well with your hand; and let it remain like this until the honey goes down and drips or closes, then take all that honey and put it on the salt and alkali like before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it will be much heat and is administered in the work of medicine and cauteries of other members Because she does some work like fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip as well as honey tessie and almond nut and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galicians tell us a cure of a man who was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and he praised it very much, and said that no other cure was made, and he was healed in a single time when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards.   
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in such a manner that you take of the green litharge fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little bit of grease, and put on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the groin; and leave it III hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter into the bath until the body is a little aroused, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will go away all and will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use cautery of such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a fire of goat, it helps much; and it must be done the cautery in such manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and soak it with old oil, and put it on the fossa which is between the thumb and foot and the other one called fossa. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After take fibers of dry goat, and put it in fire until it is charcoal, and put it on the wool, and let it stay until it is extinguished; and redo as much, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat". 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or by excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be void of fetid pills or other similar things, that on him be made upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with inche, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the clavile cautery mean according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight belly when they cry, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery sear each part of the spine equally. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointed II lines or III, and let the points be near each other.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After cure the place as long as it is sound according to what we have said, and ward that you do not administer cautery in a nerve-spasm which is in spasm. 
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is from moisture that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, that which they call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you grasp on the face of the foot, then make the cautery to all the cautery as one claims “point”. 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you do cautery on each knee III cauteries or IIII of each part, at all the olive cautery; and if you need more, make more, but don't hold your hand forcefully except as long as the tip of the heart is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, so make poins around the wrist II lines; and if there remains no pain to the two, so make poins on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, so cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and careful medicines.  
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in the arms, and the tendons descend to the elbows, it is newly, so when you see him cured, that he does not move it on that day; and that he uses things that hold up his belly, so that the fibers descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the tendons are repaired, and straighten them towards your thumbs, and sign of a circle under the rupture on the bone of the shoulder, and with a whole sign that is similar to half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and he feels them 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward; and work well the legs of the patient, and put under him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other above the hip which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight and as far as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, begin again once more until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump out when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other damage. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And knows that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also as large according to their measure; after III days cure their place with butter until the burn is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie XL days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that its dressings be loosened lengthways so that the boil does not stick out when he tries to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a good bandage made for him, and keep it on for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much high braising; and when he does this teaching so is healed entirely. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall say after this the treatment of tailoring in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the cautery of cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third part of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said one must cauterize with the cautery at III angles according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first sign the place of the joint and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand over all the fire cautery clavicle. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and quicker. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and the care of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of it, for such custom is that it must be burned to the member that is nearest, therefore it behoves you to make the cauteries as long as the patient is unhealed. 
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are aided at times by cautery with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Since you can see it being cauterized, take care that the patient is at the beginning, and if she has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not send or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then you make V cauteries on the head: I am putting the chief to nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the haiterel; and leave as long as your hand that the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the peels exit out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue from it; and cauterize on the mice according to what it is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mesentery is spread everywhere; and it manifests clearly, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and one cautery on its navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crupie and one other under, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the arms, and two on the tendons of the hip, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are on the last calf, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cauterizing on the bone of the arm, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when more is done with cautery, it does more aid, and moves it profit; and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already wholly corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in methods of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the place with flour of rice mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any limb and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the skin; then cure with dressings until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at times one makes cautery and to the hand and to the foot and to the back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus so is removed the swelling; and all the way does not intervene any one if he is not knowledgeable about the members and about the exits of the nerves moving the body.  
de albaras	from girdles
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the malady that is called "albaras" is present, and the means of medicine avail nothing, then cauterize it with a cautery one prick through, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blemish is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of vicees and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondre, of each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of sores by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the sore. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nonetheless the wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the sore; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and more right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cautery which is called "circulus", as we have said in many cauteries.  
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some one has an illness that is called «adubelati», and it is slow to die or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the heat; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in pricking; after that leave it so. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce with all the cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of the illness that is called «adubelati» until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot is raised. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	A different kind of illness there is called “corroding,” and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, because it consumes the limbs like dry ropes.  
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then sharpen the cautery hooks very small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the malady is; after that cauterize from all sides until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for III days, and put on the cauterized places bruised with oil until the scars from the fire are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ingrowing flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after III days that the carbuncle is not healing, it's good; and if it isn't, begin the cautery again on those which are remaining corrupt. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this malady is sometimes cured with hot medicine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure for hot medicine in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the  sprouts which come to the foot
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that by fire a disease is born in the feet which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that spoils the foot.  
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness is according to II manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and cautery of hot water. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cauterizing with fire is that you heat the iron cautery as a goose feather, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can bend the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges; after putting the whole hot on the nail, and turning your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it this way for III days until it begins to rot; then I make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be uprooted from their roots.   
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment hindering flesh until it is sound. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in such manner: take a chain of iron or of steel, or a feather of vulture, and put upon the nail and the nail, that is to say porrelz warts; and put the chain on so that it wraps all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water path deep to the root; and let the patient suffer a bit the burning of the hot water an hour; then let him go as it is, and it will be eradicated all its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have searched all those that are in the body, then treat the ailments that cause flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or fever quartan or other, so it befits that you make to him .iv. cauteries or .iii. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or weight, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; so will leave the trembling, and hastens the saint health from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	of festering pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time appear by fire the body bathed, or pimples coming from large rotten matters.  
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary in the first place when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that the point be grasped by the fire, or from root of long aristolochia, or to the lenticular cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from within forward, but are disrupted the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great spurts of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very tightly until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put to fire the olive cauteries more small and large as much as they are all red; then take one, or a great one or a small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein departs from the artery, one cannot well stretch it, even when the artery is great, unless by one of the four manners that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon it which have power to stretch veins; and be bound and restrained well.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring a stretching of ligaments tightly by straps or by putting things burning on it, or other similar things, if it does not profit to this?
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he should put his right index finger upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but often wet with cold water so that it be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make from then on those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures of the tail
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the maladies in which it is necessary cautery of fire, or ardent medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have put that chapter from the head jus to the foot, and I will go in this chapter by that same way for those who find it more easily what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear pupil, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary more great caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures.  
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such who have endured so much with their illness that they die easily because of the forcefulness that they find in their illness, and of the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their meaning, and say: “wait, I am healed”; and the patient is deceitful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not appropriate that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not work foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and these will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to you in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, which I have devised from the chief to foot, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The chief full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and to all those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and he thought so much because of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is like this if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split in the middle of the head a wide fissure; and be also long as two fingers, as much as the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more thick, and the abscess is larger, do two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the shoulder open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then it behooves you to split in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision draw out the moisture all outside. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After restraining the incisions of cloth and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave like this until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and leave to restrain the main bandage, and then feed the patient dry meat from moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of water, and  cut it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of summary
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone a sickness that is called “catarrh” at the eyes or at the chest, and the patient is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit, then the last cure is the cautery with those one covers the 2 arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It therefore behooves you, when you see them covered, that the patient make his head backward; after he rubs their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then strain the patient's neck to all the cloth; then look where the vein sits, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and so they are put back; then sign the veins with an incision, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from the II part, until the tail comes to the bone, and that be by the wide of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, plunge the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting also as 2 fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood jumps out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of III points, then sign of the enche and make until the bone; and what it is necessary to put out blood is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the syphac, so cover that pus does not come, then restrain the wound and tie, and the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When a chronic migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and the old soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medicine and all that does not help him, then restrain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it strains the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it above the pinches, and depart well from the webs that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the tip of the awl, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two parts. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all over without pain. 
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the six to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two leagues of a strong double silk thread, so that rotting does not come before the soldering of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the two liens in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, you cauterize it with a cuticular cautery until the bones are reached as long as the chias are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put on them tents well made; and when they are undone, let there be care with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a stop of the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and restrain it to your hand that the bleeding cease; and if you lack these present things, put on the place your cloth until the bleeding is congealed, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be restrained as it should be; and what is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant by .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thick, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have between the two knives one and a half inches wide, and then when you have marked with the two points, and you put the red hot iron above as long as it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two points; and be distanced between the two shoulders because it is not joined together by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending through the veins that are on the test of the head of fury, and it does not benefit any medicine if it is done, and you see the face of the patient twisting, and feels or front walking as if from shivering; and where the oil is wet and so much that the hair of the papers falls out, and the papers are chapped, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in ancient times "a contused cure," and you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he have on his forehead, then you make III incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as II should all remove the forehead down below until the nape, and the others II as II ribs above the cheekbones, and keep your incision from the arteries that are at II ribs above the cheekbones; and move your hand away from the continuation of the II jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of III does across the joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth for wiping the blood, then put the sharp spatula of II parts as here is the form: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is below the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the skin which is between the two incisions to all the fat that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract far this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put it in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire," and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting toward the flesh near the heart, and the rib side towards the bone, and the blade until it comes to the middle fissure.  
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches what opens to the heart, and then another part make in the middle fissure until the other end; and then extract blood equally, and press their place for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on top cloths moistened in wine and oil and aisil, and keep that abscesses do not come; and on the third day untie the thread, and there administer a great poultice of water thyme, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures used for treating wounds, as long as it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to any come catarrh acute accustomed, and you see the eyes closed and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in perform a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the mother cure that is, this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to rear his forehead, then make a wide cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one across its width. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begins from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then tie above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then cure it with drying things that make cartilage grow.  
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to prevent cartilage growth entirely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the Stoppings of Ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, stone or any other manner of thing that does not fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.  
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if there distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with condiment, and plug his nostrils when the sneezes come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear upward. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often comes strength by this cure; and if it does not come strength, to him administer the extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine single-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this, make a bird's beak of iron and thrust the head of the beak or hole into the ear very forcibly, and stop what is around the beak with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the beak; then try to force it out, because many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take glue of what birds use for their nests, and put it on any instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and try to force it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not follow all these things that we have said, then you haste to split the ear so that an abscess may come, and spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and making a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the split be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the bone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and care for it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the ear is moist because of moisture from the ear, until you have made many parts of it; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When water falls into the ear, it is appropriate for the patient to use a first-aid of condiments, and widen the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear where the water is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it leaps for this (reason), it is good.  
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not work, take many stones according to the length of your finger, light and thin, and heat them a little in the fire; and put it in the patient’s one ear opening, and pull on it from his feet on the other side, and place another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this of stone to stone until the water is all gone, and so will she come out completely; and if you see it, take a sprig, and put one end into the ear, and the other end hold on fire until the most tender part of the twig is burned; then make another piece of twigs as long as the water is all gone, as we have said in the stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body which one can feel, then administer the extraction of pincers; and this is the thing more light to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it behooves that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appears any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the canine of which here is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed in forming the whole chain; do this often as long as all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey the application, stuff the cotton in the ear canal as I said for the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them treating the distillations; and distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or of iron, narrow below to one small holes, and above open to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then throw your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caine, and let the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated over the fire thus when you distill them in the ear; and keep that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the Stoppings of Ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the swelling of wounds, or by flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes come from within the ear so one cannot see them; and sometimes they have i.e. a point of pus from the hole, and it is seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That one which comes from within so that it cannot be seen, is of great healing in more positions, and for this reason you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all this spatula from this.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be it aged and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh growing or bone of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppuration is in the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it a little over fire, then place it in the body of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels keenly in the ear, pierce lightly, and take care not to strike the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment.  
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment that comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so it is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and the root with a spatula; then put on its place powdered vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without it decorticate, so cauterize with the lenticular subtle cautery, and the cauterization after the incision is worth mutes; and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem hard in its form and in its hardness, and for this reason this disease is called «granular», and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take ward if the granule moves from one side and the other, and it’s a light thing to know; then make the large donques, then the exfoliate of each part lightly, then take the tweezers, and the cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the flesh will restore it soon and engenders flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending in the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper, and holding the hail with tweezers, cut it and press on both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye of salt water, and cure the place with that which heals flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is made in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than adults, and grieves much to their eyes, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces sideways, and sleep on top, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye.  
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your two hands and feel the exirnach between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your palm; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinarnach from each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinarnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula a trenching a slit of a width, and let it not be more than the wound that one makes to the vein; and make the skin apart as far as you come to the exinarnach; and in more dispositions comes exinarnach from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then a whole piece of cloth charpit between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left as much as it is spread; and keep that you do not add into the slit, until you come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the opening does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in oil and water, and place on the site, and restrain with bands.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind straw and put it on to corrupt the moisture which has lingered. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for him until he is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place abscess hot, so its cure of plasters soothing until it is healed.  
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on paper there grow hairs other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring about many diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the eyelids and albuginea, so much that it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: either by cautery in all fire, or by medicine aqua according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by cauteries, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, put an awl with .i. thread above; and be it below the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow beside these hairs, and pull .i. thread upwards to all the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, to all the spatula copying, from the large tear to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then place on top of the paper a figure of an enclosure, as the myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if to a person who needs it one cuts a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then make on the whole spatula above the two lines that you have marked, and start with a wide tear up to small; and let one of the splits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the scalpel in one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape all; then assemble the two lips with a seam of a needle with all the fine wool thread, and wipe the blood, and make air to the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows with none things sticky, if you see doing this; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the seam and the threads until three days or four; then cure the wound without a seam of dry and constricting things, because the paper revives to the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear; and if in another way: and that you mark the paper with a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, three incisions unscrewed according to the form which is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which surmounts the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle where it has thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put the other thread along the large tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij.  caines by art, and .ij.  subtile liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on that which rises above the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. caines of the .ij. parts forming; and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrink and draw together, until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound is cut with force, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and if the paper is removed, and they will no longer prick; and this is the form of the II canes that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works is such that you take a fine needle, and put into it 1 thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk very thin, and tie the chief of the threads; then put the patient’s head on your own; and be facing the sun so that the work is clarified, because it is a subtle and fine work; then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair adjusted, and let it pierce into the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there is 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come forth to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes forth from the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows on it; and if the hairs are small, accompany it with 1 long hair of the natural ones, and be raised with that one or you leave it, as long as it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called 'aleacrati' or rot comes in the eye, if there are of two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by a sudden blow from a wound, or incision, or cautery, and by similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and lay it until it be healed; and it does not behoove that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; but there is work of softening things, such as fennel; and the rose of water or ale and flaxseed are cooked, and diachylon ointment melted in any oil, and a tent is wrapped around it, and the cure is done with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing but addresses of this illness, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness which is dislocation is truly called “axacrati,” and is both natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and fissure and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an awl, in which it has the double thread, and place it in the cartilage, and let it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes into the two shoulders of the cartilage; then hold the cartilage above the entire awl, and the cope at the spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; if not, then take the razor and put it in the opening, and turn the paper, and make openings where it costs inside the paper; and let the heads of the two openings be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is as similar to the figure of a letter which has the name “I grieche”; then remove the flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is pulled down below, from those who follow the paper, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then care for what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, as long as it is healthy. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the malady comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the skin, and according to what is above; then bind between the two leaves of a tent, as I said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the sages masters equip everything with all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary for work and instruments in more dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the skin's surface
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture happens to a man's eye in such a manner that the skin above is glued with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the skin, and raise it up; and while holding the tweezers, as long as you cut what is attached to the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer that the spatula too sharp nor bleaches the eye; and let your incision, by which you peel back this assembly, be slight, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and all this assembly is healed, and one never uses salt water in the eye, but rather sweet water, and honey; then put between the skin and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened with oil; and after the third day use the honey and things inward until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to one hard silk, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cured burns like pinches, it cannot be; and one and the other semblance begins towards the large tear, and crosses little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and raise the paper with your hand, then coil the angle with a small doubleure, and lift it upwards; then take a needle, and put in it one hair of horse, or goat, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the angle, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and lift it upwards, and scrape all around the edge of the angle that follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the spatula subtle and as small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that through the incision the body of tears does not come as is accustomed; and no times lift the angle only once, and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all around the spatula like this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a little bit of crushed silk, and with the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it of what it needs until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot put the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lighter little sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason is quick, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar and crushed silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess pouch, then milk it and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear duct bothers the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it with a thread, and cut away a portion but not too much that the flow of tears doesn't come; then distill in the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red, and cover the eyelid and restrain over the papers and turn them to the outside, and it seems like a rose of bloom; and the work is that the patient puts his head into your healthy, then you open the eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable needles to those, and sustain it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting until the end, and keep that you do not bleed the eye in the work; and be the incision of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and as small forces of which one removes the shell, so like the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all flesh removed, then use the oil of seal ground or you distill red wine and similar medicines corrosive, and put over the eye a cotton with yolk of egg, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood does not come to the surface, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess of things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many layers are set in the eye by this way. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, it is necessary that you heal the cure of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this limb suffers that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red that are covered above the eye, and take from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you first examine if the eye, in which it is, is, and nothing else is wrong, except for the eyeball; therefore, coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your hand, then suspend those veins along the entire body according to your wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle, double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two incisions be by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then with this coil you force those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins outside of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrode what remains of the red vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have power to collect all these in that hour, so make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are appeased and be assured of hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then the ruler has all the tools of this form; and it is called "sharp head," and be made from fire iron to one chief rounded, and be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on top the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little bit as long as you know that the corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is joined, and flesh grows, and the bowel's body is joined, and it remains thus for XL days, and it does not renew and is not at all an abscess, know that it is healthy; if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the vein according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the iron in this shape, and let the head of iron be at III angles, and let the shaft be thinned until the top as you see here. 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it upon the bone beside the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn all the instrument until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes in this if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, then the matter goes to the cheek; thus is lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open and there is no disturbance to the nose or lessening, then it behooves you to bind the patient; then heal, then put on suction cups or a haeretel without injuring to suck, then put on the eye  i. linen made of acaice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and emplaster above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need; then bind it from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then it behooves you to strain it much; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then restart the emplastering and cloths and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of the dislocation of a linen cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a tear comes in the woven cloth, then open it and there come forth like i. grain of resins, and is expectable to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put one needle in the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is i. double thread of the part of the seam; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then withdraw the needle and put the other half linen oil in abundance of an egg; and let it stay until the thread falls with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at no time the wound is restrained by the grape each part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter immediately; then withdraw it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowel of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This sickness which is called «alcunnati» is not other than a bow that is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work so is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands of II parts, and move it as long as you see the bow coming to the top to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and be discombree the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have said.  
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatula and with it on the cornea touch  a point by continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the corona, as long as the bubble is there; and when it is out, pour distilled water hot mixed with honey, or water in which fennel has been boiled and honey, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of thorns of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of the eyes in division, and what is necessary to examine them; so work according to the healthiness.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy eye tightly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument that is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument next to the cornea by the width of a hair in that whiteness of the eye at the part near the tear duct, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" skillfully, and restrain your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty space; and it behooves you that the measure of the almagda's path be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the cornea of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then put the instrument up to where the liquid is, then squeeze it down one passage after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water descends now, so the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.  
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the liquid returns by the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is in place and does not go up, gently withdraw the albuginea, turning your hand back and forth; and then put back into the eye a bit of silken thread, and leave out the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by fire the oiled or moistened cloth in rose oil and in abundance of egg, and bind with the healthy eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on as common bread with an abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if "almagda" cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is fitting that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep in its passage, but make it subtly, then put almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with a bed before, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be free from all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and examine his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you tie it up, because the water rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and the head of those who soothe the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the eye and place upon its face the orilliet to cover for any day, and let it be under in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he goes out of the house here and there, and converts to his case; and know that none of disciples should interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda pierce, so that one sucks the liquid, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them they see them; and be of rain properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of the wing of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the birth
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or made various horns joined together, so that some resemble scorpions with many feet; and if there are such and the horn has a skin of bad color, and also has skin of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chariots which is not wounded, and not broken, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the incense to those chariots, and the straw outside; then cut what you can hold with the fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the chariot is entirely removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it entirely i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if there is no swelling or abscess, cover it as it is proper; and if it is a malignant abscess, haste and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then apply either boiling water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is clean; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments cannot come to cut: therefore it is necessary that you put I linen thread a little thick, and be anointed with hands ours, and have between each nut I space; and put the patient's shoulder of the thread in his nose at its power, and pull in smelling until it comes by the nose inside the mouth; and many times children do so at school, and it is easy for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel one after the other being as we are who are or thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know that the new ones have corrupted that flesh, then treat the wound, wipe the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back in its place as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the head a bandage of wool for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, for which one distills the oils and medicines in the head.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a can, and you lead it thus; and if you wish, make a closed can, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head; and have i. handle at the top for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the birth
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times at the beginning of birth a sickness arises which is called "telul," and it grows and becomes large very quickly, to the point that it is a thing to behold; and for this reason it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and pull out all the pus, then put on its place the cautery or medicine burning; and if one delays to cut it until it is large, beware, if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation; do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it once, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be all cut out, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with things drying and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the birth is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage works, it does little good, for in certain men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all the parts of their core until they are healthy, then assemble the two lips together with a suture, and bind it, and put powder over powder of dragon’s blood, and ground incense; and put above the powders a piece of plasters of strong or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have let you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To men's hands happen inside the lips abscesses hard, seeming to grains of vezis, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each knot, and take it with tweezers and cut it in every part; then apply there after incision of vitriol ground, until the blood is stanched; and then the leaf of aisil, and cure the place of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times flesh is born on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the wound open for the blood to flow; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this flesh returns after the incision, and often happens so, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and pull out the teeth or scabs appear, until nothing remains; and thus do of blackness and greenishness, and jaundice and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it's good; if those no, so it begins again the second day and the third, until you have all pulled out; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to pull out, according to what the work shows you, because the scraper with which one pulls out outside the teeth have other forms than those with which one pulls between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to draw as much as you can, because one must not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to remove.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to milk, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth aching. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient, and thinks that it is or tooth Saint, and make milk the good tooth; and nevertheless does not depart me the pain by this, as long as the evil is strained, because we have already wanted to do so to these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth ailing, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all its. a spatula hard for warder the gum from all sides; then the moves to your two or tongs subtle in the first place and place, as long as it is well dislodged, then i firm well the tongs; and be the head of the patient on your saint between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and put it gently into each side, and move it as you did before.  
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages, where the holes are; and hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break when you pull it; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore take good care that you do not break it, and that a part remains, and returns to the patient through the wickedness of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard that you do not act as the ignorant doctors do, who by their haste and boldness break sometimes the bone, and bring them not what we have recounted; but cause often by the incision of these great ills for the roots that remain there, or for the bone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if blood comes from the wound, which often happens, apply vitriol powder to it; and if this does not work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, to what one moves the teeth first, be long points and big handles, that they do not double when you will draw the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be big members so that they do not bend when drawing, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed for better holding.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the teat, it is necessary that you place upon it cotton moistened with butter for a day or two. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the eye is still moist, then put in the forceps that are called "algebri," so that the shoulder appears like a bird's beak; and be made inside like a file and this is its shape: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a spatula, because of this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root leaps out with those, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument so that it may not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not numbered; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks not the bone of the horse or of other bones, as it can, then he seeks the instruments that are necessary, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then return to its place of medicines suitable for those, and if it has in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it befits that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or trim it; therefore the edge; and if it is near with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of pointed iron at the top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping a little bit each day for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, so the file of a certain form as this is:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little each day lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks; then the plain at the end to nothing a scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pierces the tongue, so it is necessary to file the sharpness so that it is equal, so that it does not pierce the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth loaches, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he can chew without it hurting, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and this does not work; if so, it is necessary to restrict it with a thread of gold, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too fine nor too coarse, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are crooked, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the jaws between the teeth that have fallen out, if there is one or more, until you wisely come to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering until the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.  
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the ends of the wire with pliers and bring them together, and put them between a healthy tooth and the broken one, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it like this as tight as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the wires are broken, restrain it with another wire; let it remain and serve like this until the end of its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two broken ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, fresh against fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and patient should intervene, and sometimes the form of a tooth made from bone of walrus is made, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is restrained as we have said, and remains and serves in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No times is this ligament that comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined; and the works are such that you work the mouth of the sick, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or something else, and it is from the closing of a wound, so put the awl and cut wide that ligament; and guard that the cut be not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, raise the place with rose water and honey, or with cold water, then put under the tongue a linen tent; and bandage the sick each night, that the place cannot join. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put on the place ground vitriol; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentil cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a fiery color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, put the awl and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding persists in your work, put vitriol ground on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw all out; then raise the head with honey and salt, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come within the throat bumps which are called “godath,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of little size and yellowish color, do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the bleeding; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it would break by itself; and if it is white in color, and the root is thin, have your instrument prepared to cover it, but first see if the abscess chafes and rests. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit facing the sun, and his arms be on his waist, and he opens his mouth and the surgeon places the instrument between his hands, and presses the tongue down with all the instrument, this is the form; and it is of silver or fine steel like a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, so take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and draw it forcefully upwards as much as you can; and do nothing of the fabrics with it, then cut with the instrument, from which is the form, that seems like forces; but anyway the chief are bent, and one place to the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or d'andainne:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pliers, from which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be trenching on one side and the other side name; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and thus, and if decorrement of blood happens, so gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then cure it until it is healed; and some times other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them as you did the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman of an abscess that was within her throat, that is to say the abscess of small size; and I had well nearly closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high raised that it had been necessary to put two fingers through each of the two openings. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then did this, and put one in the one incision, then pulled out the thread, and in drawing a large portion of the bowel; then I refixed another piece in the other part of the two, and I opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after I put the incision in these abscesses, and scraped a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus was cleared the woman's throat conduit, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I burned it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it stayed without growing; and I left those parts, and know only that God did to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the stem grows upward to the grape, and it is swollen and long, it is called “perpendicular”; and if it is very large and rounded, it is called “grape”. 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it.  
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril to the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It therefore behooves you, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have made mention of before; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it downwards, and the probe to the II instruments that I have said in the incision of the II almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice, and to speech; and after the incision, use those things that we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it as long as it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears to be cut, then you must use an instrument for the cauterization of the senses that cause fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy side, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in this chapter of cautery, and confines with a very sharp knife, so that it be not too thick nor too bright; and in employing the end of this instrument, because this is its form:  
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on his head a hair or one puts the medicine, as the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the uvula; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles come from his mouth of the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the palate; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burn and the incisions of the medicine be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres on the uvula; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and fall after .iiij. days or .v.. And if you have need to begin the cauterization of the medicine again, then begin it again, and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in 1 pot, and put it inside, and boil it; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have 1 instrument of hair according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it silver or lead, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the grape through the vein, until the grape is mortified; after that it often recommences, until the grape dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a canine and put inside its head a wick of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the wick of wool does not make the vapor hurt the mouth, and it is good cure together salvation.  
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or spine of fish, or any thing, gets stuck in the throat; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behoove you to make the sick person vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will expel the thing through vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1 mouthful of dry bread; and tie to the sponge 1 thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will get stuck, and then you draw it out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take 1 instrument of plank according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of life come to it, nor push in the bone; and move it better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows whether it is well or the thing is difficult; so he pushes down, or pulls it up with all the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the throat's bleeding
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	At no time is medicine given to the bleeding patient, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the suture, then treat it with all the small pincers, or with subtle pliers that are good for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not enough, take a heated iron and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the end of the iron where the hair is hot, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And let the patient hold water all day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full a glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and put it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he will spit. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will fall without harming. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has burning coals in it, and let the cover be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that one put the head of the instrument; then you put your fumigation there, and the patient puts the head of the cauldron in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the nostril; and the nostril will now fall, and if it does not fall, begin the fumigation again many times; and endure thirst, and drink salty and sour things, and do not drink water; and then the matter is necessary that it is done through this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument that is used to treat the sinus is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those that memory comes here after from one and the other in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in II manners where one is in its own likeness, and of those which it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the wounds which are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscess of the head is other than that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is other than that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.  
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one should not cut until the boil is ripe according to its fulfillment; and if to some that it is necessary to cut when they are crude, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are near joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it remain as long as it is rotten and swollen, by chance, the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is why there is contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the foundation, pierce it so that it may ripen; and it is not proper that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion, except for the one which is near the foundation, lest it pour forth, and become elongated inside, and a fistula comes; and it cannot heal in a long time.  
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and of the swelling and of the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more dependent the place of the abscess, and where it appears to open; and be the perforation of the long one of the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or on the feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pliability.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that are displaced by following according to which limb. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it's good that you leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.  
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce him before these, the body of his venom will become elongated and is full of much filth; and by chance it hardens the lips and the depths of him. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs have need.  
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to remove the core, and cover; when it has become as if a sheet, and is withered, then it is necessary to do as with boils; and if there are such that are cut in III angles, and if there are such that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angles; and if there are such where one makes a round size, and other sizes and seeming cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, if you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then plug the abscess until the other day, then drain nothing directly; do this many times from great to great, until the pus is gone completely; same for if the patient is of feeble strength, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men decrepit.  
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes escapes with the exit of the bowels, which by chance may kill the patient, and you should not be concerned about it.  
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, then administer bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have covered it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen without moisture, and tie it up until the third day; then bone, and cure with ointment until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, so administer cold water and ease, and moisten the bandage, and put it on the place bleeding many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, it should be administered government and care, and the powders that I have said in this book by hand, and if it is wintertime, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is summertime, and the wound is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on cloths moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then unbind the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as is proper, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is important to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of  the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where near the head come small abscesses, and are mannered of us that are in webs, as like the bush of a vine, and much in them are similarities. 
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such that have moisture like the legs; and there are some which are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it.  
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are that you should experience to all instrument which is called "entromissoire," of which its form comes after, what it contains.  
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then it is dried by means of a long cloth. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is dried, then carefully scrape without leaving the hair that contains that moisture, because it returns as soon as one leaves it nothing; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain dry should be cleaned.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resumes the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain in any of it; then cure the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed.  
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in fat, then cut according to this form, long; and put your knives there, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your care to drain the pus where it lies; and if the artery goes against you, then do what I have told you after.  
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do with an abscess if it is purulent, and of cutting and curing as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on a pus-filled abscess and moist one is easier, because they contain little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these fut I abscesses that I opened or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot be broken; and if one had made any incision on it, one would have done just as well as with a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, where those that come to the chief of children and to the roots of ears, the opening should be always at the most dependent point, in order to let out the pus; and the treatment as it is proper. 
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body, and they are bad, and they are intertwined with each other. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its side, like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar appearances to these scrofulas. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that do not want to obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that therefore that you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not harsh to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep; so it is necessary that you cut it from above, and the peel from each part, and are the II lips of the heart as ones, if you have need of it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and the treat prick and prick, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and not be the spatula too thick nor trenching, that the hand does not escape, and see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put vitriol powder, or any powders that stop blood, in the wound, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to purr. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stanched, return to your work, until you have completed it; then examine with your index finger if there are any small scabs, and cut them and cleanse them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has in the root of the scrofulous vein a great one, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofulous at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, because there is no delay of superfluity for the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	So it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and to suck out pus, and then cauterize as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more; and pierce it like the one before said, in depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then the cure of ointment preventing flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	of a hernia
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help them, because all the veins and the arteries of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two cheeks.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below III circles or IV with a small incision across, between the II circles or by the quantity of the incision of the syfac, nor in the cartilage; and these are so suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it conviene that he extend the skin of the throat to all the neck, then cut the keel as long as it comes to the windpipe; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the phlegm of the windpipe that it flows from where it is broken, and by the defect of the voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone against the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one does not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect comes from the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are guarded from death; and for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is passed, and it is passed in III days or in IIII. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, as long as it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took the knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; and I was called by her to cure her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and so well that it had not cut a vein nor led further than the throat, and the wind was blowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I bandaged it, and so I treated the wound until it was healed; and it happened to the young lady that she was hoarse in voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; for this reason I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.  
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a wound, and it is very common in women; and it is according to II manners: natural, and accidental; where nature does not have an engine. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to us fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear in it, and it does not become work to do forcibly except in this one who is small, and proves and searches the whole introducer: if you find it as I fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as one cuts the us, and treat it throughout its entire head, if there is any; and enclose well all, and cure it as it should, until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	of ours
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are ours, of which I will say all the appearances; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that out is sometimes and fever holding, as long as the boil is not passed, and is accomplished the putrefaction; therefore rests the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syphilis, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a blister, and becomes large; and they are according to two appearances, whether fat or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first of all about the instrument called "entromissoire," according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses as we do is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer, and take care in those that leap further. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, make it as I have said of other abscesses; and if after the probe there comes no moisture, know that it is fat, so make it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape it on each side and ward the coat where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the root; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, so drain it in pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it does not remain there, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, apply to the wound some corrosive powders sharp, and restrain the wound, and put on above soothing things,  a hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the swelling is great, stitch the two lips of the wound, and cure it as someone who forms flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is contrary or otherwise if you are in haste and apply the place of ground vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound is rotting, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover those that remain from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of instruments for introduction, and they are in III ways: large and medium and small; and there are III squares that are called "albaret", and I which is called "breb", and there are in III ways: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like needles with which one sews the sorceress's wounds, and they are made of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth it most, and they are more proven by black plum for surrounding the fistulas' corbeurs; and they are in III ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.  
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the tongs are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are tongs that have II curves in III ways also; and there are tongs that have III curves, and are also in III ways; and there are tongs that have II curves, and tongs of a single curve only, and are in III ways; and all of these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these tools is sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we skin the flesh with so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve; and these instruments are probes put back in handles so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another smaller instrument, resembling finger picks, according to this form, to which we bleed.  
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at no time in the place that is healthy for opening of veins and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts; and they remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form from this line b. up to g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh growth, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it is healed; and if the swelling becomes larger, as women have it, make two incisions above, in similar fashion; so that one holds the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply there what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the care, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it drains the remaining part and fat, then care for it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous nodules in which there is pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore who contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line .b. until the line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole core that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound some old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as before to it until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like the appearance of scrofulous sores, then make it as we have said in cutting open scrofulous sores, and if the wound enters inward, administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the artery rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin above it is stitched together, then many times abscesses come; and just as often it happens to a vein that is swollen and has an abscess; and if one knows whether this is because of the artery, then the abscess is long in shape; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a pulling sensation; and when it is because of the vein, then there are red streaks appearing; and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is beneath the armpits and elbows and neck and many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It behooves therefore to shun the cure of iron, and he who is at chief behoove also to shun, and in that which is inflamed by artery making from above the skin with long; then work the size as incisions, and depart beautifully the artery of the cloths, until it is discovered; then put below it a needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and extract the artery of a double thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries which are in temples; then point the place which is between the II links of an intromissoire until the blood that is there issues, and be it delieze the abscess; then administer the cure that enjanre bowe, as long as the link hangs; then cure those of ointment following to those, until it is healthy; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, so it behoove that you hold in your hand that which you can of the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle below the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there is I double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or link of one of II parts as II chiés of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads are not issued, so I put back another needle to all I thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and extract the threads in IIII leagues; then cut the abscess until the superfluities there issue, then cut the superfluity of the keur and leave that which is tied; then put on top I drapeil moist in wine and oil, then administer it cures of tents and ointments as long as it is healthy. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come in the nerves when they are  worn out, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all their joints, and it is grief abscesses, and its color seems the color of the body, and is in more dispositions without pain; and when one restricts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and is not well throughout the body, but below the heart; and moves well from all sides, and does not go neither forward nor backward, nor down nor up, and those who are in the joints should not be covered with iron: lest there might be contraction; and those who are on the head or forehead, make the skin to a spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it to the winch, and flay it, then clean and gather the wound together with sutures, and dress it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and the roots are subtle, and the head is large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and pus flowed from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the work in incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if it cuts with a broad spatula, and be in your presence the cautery to fire.  
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist there often come too great discharges of blood, and if the bleeding does not stop, then hasten quickly to cauterize it; and if you see that the patient is fearful and frightened by the incision of iron, then take a thread of lead well made, and tie it around the limb as we have said, and leave it for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the thread of lead until it closes the limb, and heals itself without effort; and if the roots are thick, you may be afraid to cut them even with the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not cut the tendon which is of pale color and poor sensation and milky looking.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess festering, and I will come to the cure of syphilis later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the skull is moved
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fissure in the skin, and is on the belly and has some bubbles, like they have in other sores, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or of wind; and if it is due to the rupture of the fistula and the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens through diverse outlets. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is because of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with his hands, it returns up, and then comes back down, and perhaps it is closed, and grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and for strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and are fixed according to an amount; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look at its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you should leave the care. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, so it behooves you to command the patient that he keep his arm, and be outstretched straight, then place a cloth all around the belly; then command him to grip hard between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above all the great incision; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the wound be closed with the linen; then operate the half of the abscess extended over the linen, and put your index finger, and search the intestine; if you find it caught by the linen, so untie it, and put the intestine out of the belly's exit; and if you find the bowel, so take it at the incision, and cut off the superfluity; and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, so go well around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II strong threads, and put the II needles around what you have done in a cross that you make piercing; then strain the abscess in IIII leus on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it will rot, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it of what it behooves, and close the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the place of what it behooves, and solder the place. 
dou chancre	Of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the resemblances of ulcers, and how one must work them by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say the ulcer is prevented in the marshlands, and great caution should be exercised in its treatment, and ancient ones said that when an ulcer is in a place where one can shave it like an ulcer which is on the breast, and in the hip, and in similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not proper that you approach it, because I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion; then make the patient's good bed to perform the operation; then lay your forceps or ulcer, and shave it on all sides, and take away everything completely without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run out entirely, and gently press the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding from the wound goes against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the bleeding is extinguished; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is only illuminated; and one should not touch iron in these two likenesses: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, look if the sick person is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and diarrhea and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the sick person of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: lift the sick person upright on your hands, and the minister presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part under the ribs, then take the spinous spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be it cut from two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point, and all ways be not so deeply that it can come to the intestine when one puts it in, and do not be able to pierce it; then see if the hydropsy is engaged towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you fends above the bud III two right below the armpit; and if the hydropsy is for the disease of the liver, so be your cut on the left side of the bud III two; and if it is for the mucus, so be it to the right, and it does not befit that the patient lies on the cut that the superfluities do not run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and put it in, and raise your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as when you are scraping at the quantity of a nail or so; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the height of eight, and this is the place of the water, then take the water out, and put back this instrument because it is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver needle, and is of iron or archant light, and in the lower part I has a small hole; and on one side, III holes; and II on the other; and I on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather. 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now upon the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than it should in that hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the heart which stops the passage that is on the syfac, for this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat from the point a little quantity; do this any day, and guard yourself from flooding until there remains no more than an amount of blood.  
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and give him much water, so cure of burial or hot sand, and with sweat or bath and sun, and he is to drink; and cure of drying medicines until it be healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without any holes in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary immediately he must look at all of the small spatula according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or pierce the thin cloth plug, and tie it and keep it so for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.  
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, so is medicated with the clove of plank, as we have said, if it will enlarge. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the penis in its place are blue, because none are born with the penis at the head of the shaft, for that reason they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum raised as high as a feather, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and guard against bleeding which often comes, and if it happens, let him who stanches blood stanch the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come to this [area] of the penis, and is a loathsome appearance of flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with .i. one subtle needle, and scrape and clean all of them, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of bad colour and pus-filled, then you must apply a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have it caught, and if the nail is in some on the handle, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the nail which is inside first; and when it is joined, then you cure the one outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure it together, make sure the head of the stick is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its stick and groin; so it is necessary to shave off everything that is black and corrupt, then lay on top a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and chickpeas, then cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help with two kinds of disorders: namely, the letting of blood, and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you put or lead a chain of lead into the penis, and urinate on the patient; and when the skin is pierced at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the threads are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if this is a painful thing to consider, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula any point at the head of the penis and of the skin; then pull gently between the two, and put there a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will, and properly on children, then it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the most part of the masters and healers who did circumcision around one [inch], and with force, and to all a new knife; so it was good because there are two layers, and by chance if one chops above and remains the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is better to cut and the pain is doubled, and at the purification which is around one inch [of distance from the glans] the point of the member is not guaranteed; and at the purification of the angle by chance the iron escapes, and the work is spoiled, and many times they are born such that they do not need purification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification which is made with forces to the whole line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, so it be equal in I whole soul tens; but that the thread be well strained around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be as that thou makest think to the child, if he understand, that thou make him only tie the thread around the staff so much, and then make him rejoice in all manners that thou canst; then make him rest between your hands straight, and raise forces between your hands or below your feet that the babe does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the staff and blow or heart, and draw it upwards until the head of the staff be in; then cleanse well of the filth which is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie below I poc a the other lien; and hold as II dois by the second ligature to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the II liens, then raise the heart upwards gently and draw the head of the staff; then let the blood run drop by drop, for it is the cure; and put powder on top and on top of the powder the drapeil glued with a piece of egg cooked unsweetened with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure him from other cure until he be healed. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces in the unification thus is this: the two shoulders should be held and be sharp, and the shoulders also as large as the palms equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the unification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the leaus make an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass three days, and what is below the rod is swollen, let it be so until the abscess has calmed, and the scab slightly; then cut it as you can move, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not hurt him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts out too much, and it goes above, it will do no harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or blood congealed, or a bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is at the neck or opening of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part above his back, and restrain the patient’s legs as much as he can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with all the instrument which is called “syringe,” of this shape: and let it be of silver thin and light like the feather of a bird; and let the handle be a palm long and a half, and let it be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top of the piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the mound; then put the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order for that by whom it conducts or where it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread all over the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then withdraw it, and make the urine correct; and recommence the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood come in the bladder, or rot is gathered there, and you see it distilled with sharp waters and medicines, so do to all the instrument that is called "clepsedre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the ends of the [chevez] because the medicine should be such that it stops the rod well without addition, if one can drain the moisture, and expel when necessary; and when you see to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the catheter into the moisture, and draw with the [drawing instrument] that is inside; so draw the moisture to the catheter, and then firmly push back the [instrument] inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: here it is: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of archut, and it is the head higher; and below at the breast where the chains fall; then take a bladder of sheep and put in it the moisture that you see to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double fine thread, and heat the point of the clyster on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture happening, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put the strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a size; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears harene, and grieves the patient his member, and he can many times, and then urinates; and with much of these jumps the foundations; and it is light the healing of the children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter of those who have the large stone, than of those who have the small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.  
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he often hinders seeking the stone.  
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate and move them down so that the bladder descends to the middle of the leg, and it comes out once from its high place; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder be entirely declining downwards; then bring and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at touching the whole, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and put it in its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it toward the neck of the bladder; then press on top with your finger, and push it out to where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between those that are between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be right above the stone, and your two sides should be either foundation or top, and let the waist be cut so that it is wide outward, and inward narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; by adventure press the two sides that are foundation or top, that she may come out without work; and know that there is such a stone where there are angles, and margins: if it is wounded, go over it; and if there is one like a gland, and round, whose issue is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To whoever has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not open, then it is necessary that you extract it with the pliers which are like a file at the top, to force the stone out so that it does not escape; or you put under it a subtle instrument bent at the top; and if you cannot manage it thus, enlarge the hole of the opening, and if it does not open, strain it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the larger, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be cut open, and make a larger wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the leaks cannot be soldered; but nonetheless, you must strive to drain it, or to debride with forceps, until you have extracted it in pieces; and when you have accomplished your work, you apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, in order to appease the hot abscess; then suture the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the area with oil and water, then treat it with diaphicon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and by this retained urine, which is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore you must put in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it; then raise the wound from water and ash and seal, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all hours that you cure him, you bind his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on top of the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is where the duct of the urethra leads, and fixed within, and the urine cannot flow; so the cure of what I say thus, that you cut it many times, is excused from cutting through this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested this thus.  
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron forest according to this form and be it at three angles fitted into one twig:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then thrust the forest in the shaft lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the forest in your hand on the stone point by point, as long as you can feel the stone from the other side; soon thereafter will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once, and jumps with the urine, and the patient heals; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one string below the stone and the other above, then make the rod go into the stone between the two strings, then pull it out, and untie the string, and purify the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens sometimes that a stone is in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is grievous, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-knowing who reveals herself to the eyes, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the woman's stone is more deep than the man's stone, so it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, then it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and with care find one, and if you cannot find one, then no need to cast mire subtle; and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her buttocks or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain her below her buttocks, and recommend her that she put her buttocks on the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is felt appearing, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move its (the) two above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small; then put the point into the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as much as the stone can exit, and know that many types of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have reins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the resemblances to know the outcome. 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone does not give way, then put vitriol powder on it, and hold it there for an hour until the stone is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones for men to aid you in your work; and if the stone does not give way, and it is the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the wound and strain with strips and bandages, and do not begin again, and leave the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then cure the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the wounds are healed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquatic ramice is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is from the heart of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e. another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have se poc non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and is spread that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining to jaundice, or red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, I long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess re-occurs with a part of the egg, and for this reason people think that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syfac, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, suspect all the intromissoire quarreit, of which the form is before.  
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something a little high, and puts under him a lot of cloths; then sit on his left side, and command the minister that he sits on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the breasts; then take the spatula straight, and cut the skin of the breasts among them as long as near the armpit, and let the incision be completely straight, separating the skin of the breasts up to the white fascia, and scrape it subtly according to your power; then pierce the white fascia full of water at the wide opening, and extract all the water, and then put your tweezers, and raise the white fascia; and do not touch the heart of the breasts, but only the fascia; cut the whole or by pieces equally well, that if you do not cut it well sagely, it will return the water; and if the wound is a success in your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the breasts to one suture, then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another malady, then it behooves you to tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flowing of blood; then cut the boil at all its suspension, and draw out the ulcer, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part as you have done with the first evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wounded place half-wool soaked in rose oil; and put outside another wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two pads, and put on top of them doubled cloths, and tie it on above all the linen according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapelz, and use them of wool fleece according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders pricks onto the foundation up to the back, and the other on the side of the armpit; and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and be all assembled the restraint in the loop of the braier; and sometimes is medicine this ramice of cautery in place of iron size, and it is that you prick the cautery cultellar fine, and cut the leather of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the liquid is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scorch it with this subtle cautery hot. 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the wound in all ways that you can, as long as you are scraping everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salved; and moves guarding against a decrease of blood, and movements that the works of size; and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscesses or bleeding or another thing, so cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.  
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, administer a perforation as I tell you, and when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the watery root is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with all the spatula wide, and put the perforation deep into the body; and let the opening be wide, so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave to flow the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, of which the form is before; and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.  
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, for which it seems to me that one should leave it alone; and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.  
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the genitals; and this is by many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by superfluity sour and acute, which is spread to the groin, or by percussion; and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a painful abscess; and perhaps are some abscesses grievous fearful and stony, and of dark color, and sometimes comes from out of an artery, or from the swelling of a vein.  
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by the artery's vein, so it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch of both hands, and one can well make the incision on this semblance, and on the other parts; and it is that you cut the core of the coins, then the egg being at the top, and the white part thereof be extracted, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the egg.  
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already softened with these new vessels, then you should draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is adhered to the syringe or in that which is within the vessels, then you should deliver all of that membrane and cut it roundly.  
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the shaft is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the works are completed, apply the wound to wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a lambskin, with the softening of the boils, and the patient groans when he walks; and the cure of this illness is as fearful as before, but nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then put the suspensory from the groin to your two hips, and all the vessels which are near the penis, and cover them with the masters, and extend them; then cut with a sharp spatula wide through the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then peel them on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in temples; then put an awl where it has the double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and drain the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as with others where one injures a bow, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the groin; for by this there comes no evil, and if to all the vessels comes blood, it is necessary to drain the groin on all the vessels; so that the veins do not lose their nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are by the section that comes or there it is, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, so the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the buttocks; and this rupture is either at the side or from the extension of the, and come these II manners of wound from causes: or by percussion, or by jump, or by fall, or by lifting of heavy burdens, and by similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of the , are that there is a ache and ache, in long time, and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess even up to the parfont, for that the  pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the pus, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess appears diversely, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body outward from the pus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines with the abscesses, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron there is fear, because it befits to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine into his hand within the wound, if he can enter it; then be supported on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips; then keep the heart above, and cut all the skin of the buttocks long; then put inside the folds of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the eyes can go out; then scrape the soft tissue that is below the skin of the buttocks, until the white soft tissue is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger into what follows the buttock, in what is between the white soft tissue that is below the skin of the egg, and between the second soft tissue, and depart from what is behind the egg, and between the second soft tissue; and then move with the right hand inside the heart of the buttocks, and keep the white soft tissue on top to your left hand, and raise the egg onto all the soft tissue toward the waist; and instruct the minister that he extend the egg upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and ask with your thumbs if there is any intestine wrapped or white hard soft tissue, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below; then take a needle which has a thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the soft tissue, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the chiés that appear from the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the soft tissue, of which we have said that it is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong tie of II parts; then wrap the chiés of the threads, and tie them together in form of II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, except an abscess may come; and put the tie straight according to the first long tie II thumbs of that one, and after these II ties leave the soft tissue which is below the heart of the buttocks the width of a thumb; and after all the other one according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the buttocks, as much as the sinew and the bow, as we have said before; then put moistened wool in oil, and put it in the wounds, and put the tie that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is cauterized the white groin that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the linen until it is dripping through it; and if it delays in drying, so be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it dries; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I never saw anyone daring to cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is assembled to the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin as we have said, and opens the parts; and no intestines come out to the parts, and if any do come out, it is little, and heals every hour; and nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, then the wound or syphilis grows, until the intestine comes out; and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis which is in the groin as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen the parts and opened; and the cure is by cautery as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is the patient lies soundly on his back between your hands, then cut the part of the rupture inflated wide according to the quantity of III fingers; and then extract the syphilis which is under the skin that the one inside, then take the rait and put it on the place appearing of the syphilis; and press it in the fullness of the belly, then sew the II parts appearing of the syphilis on the head of the rait, and sew the one and the other; then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut the syphilis nor extend the one or other thing as I have made you know in the cure of the ramice of the intestines; then cure by the cure of the wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it defiles and cures the wound, as long as it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The back is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the genitals is softened in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you see, stitch first the superfluity of the softened skin to three or four firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the  treatment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterization is common in our law, and for this reason I would like not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the healers should know how to respond when asked about it, and know the cure; and the other, because we often need cauterization of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals.  
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that a cautery is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the bones are softened and pliable; then grasp them with your hand until they are put back and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of size: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut above each knot at the point, when you will have well scourged them; and leave no prick where the syfac and the subtle syfac are on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing remains of the testicles, because the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.  
des hermofrodites	of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men: one if it is that between the II sexes opens as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it is upon the privy also like a rod and there are two openings. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of man and woman is that you cut the attached cords, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.  
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tumor is a lump attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you take the superfluity of the tissue to your hand or at the incision, and cut lightly; and do not cut too deeply, lest bleeding come forth, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed; and for one other sore that arises at the mouth of the wound, and the lip, and by chance falls out, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this they called it in old times "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cover it, as we have said the contagion, and the care until it is healed. 
de erratique	of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident by illness that has come to it; or it is by a char fastened, or by the subtle or thick syfac, and it is made in the groin, or ribs, or below, or wherever; and prevents conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the examination of the bail.  
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppage is close to appearing, either to both or to one. 
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle syfac and it is near the two leaves, then haste, and do this: put your two index fingers together, and the woman be upon her back, legs spread; then make the two leaves form, until the subtle syfac is round, and be over the swelling; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and place it upon the place, and lie the woman down each day so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the knife is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with the spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh, then suspend it to the band and the cup; and take medicines that stanch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and a bundle of egg white; then administer a wide poultice of wool, so that the wound may not close; and thus be long, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured with other dressings until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a boil comes in the marshes, it should be covered according to this manner, if it is not infected abscesses. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thulled; and we have said in the division the likenesses of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are opened in the flesh, and they do not appear to smell, except for the treatment by iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those that one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It behooves you therefore to put the woman in a cold house, then is the altarul as tweezers, and the cope at its roots, then powder on restraining medicines such as acaice and dragon blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there comes bleeding, so let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confect it with honey and aisil, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays in place, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If that is not the case, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without hurting; then take linen and moisten it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, care for its place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called “albathir” is red, and is similar to the harsh chief, so it must be covered as I have said in the rule; and then the care until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come in the marshy areas, such as ulcers and boils and herpetic sores and tumors and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.  
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of fire, look at whether the abscess is thick at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten yourself to pierce, but let him rest until the pain is quieted; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have him small seats so that he leans, and supports his back and assembles his feet toward the outside of the leg; and let his hips be spread out, and put his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage; then pull him gently toward the right side, and there administer the instrument by which one works on the mouth of the marrow, of this that comes after the form; and it is necessary that when you see administering this instrument, you put the tip first in to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters inside the instrument does not come deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he puts the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it soft with their hand, then it is necessary to cover at the top, at the spatula left; and when the wound is emptied, then it is necessary that you put into the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in green dry oil; and place the tent from the wound to the edge of the margin, and place outside above the margin and on the lance clean cloth dipped in water or mallows be cooked; then cure after II days of ointment before this, until it is healed; and any time raise the margin and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristeloche long be cooked; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is put back in its place, it is necessary that you guard yourself from iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The first thing to do is to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs of it when you see a woman press down and want to smell fresh air: then quickly the child feels the urge to come out; therefore, you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the head comes out first, and the second follows; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the child comes out soon; because when it comes out headfirst, the second follows, and the mother is rid of her superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes further the body or shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes upon its belly, or groin, and is converted by chance upon its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid them.  
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes on its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth loudly, and the virtue of her is weak, then she make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and cut at its fingernail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and hold the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her sneeze and cough, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: thus now the child will be born. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are out, it is necessary that you put them gently back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up; then tip over the seat on the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when tipped over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife which is before placed, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on his feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, it is proper to push them upward; and then turn them back and forth, until they are even; then seize its feet and extend them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He jumps up to his hips if commanded to, and has it coughed out of condition; if he leaps further, God wills. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not healed as we have said, then return it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is gently set.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forward as we have said, then take muslinage of wheat and sesame oil and melted gum, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a hot bath until under the ribs; and when she is softened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh, and put it under, and let her stay for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and take her belly gently, because the child now jumps. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on and on; then let him be laid on his back, and have his legs hanging down, and lie on the bed; and he folds his hands on and on, and then he takes the hands on his belly, and removes the cushions below, until she is arranged down; and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them upwards, then moves the belly upward, then puts his hands; and he moves the child on and on; and commands the woman to keep pressing him as long as the child rises.  
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It behooves to engineer bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on her bed, and uncross her legs; then administer the musculature that I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then try to bring back the hand; and when the child is born according to the natural figure, then make her sneeze, and command her that she should breastfeed until the child is weaned. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It behooves the bailiff to hold his hand, then turn it back and forth, and the other lightly; and when it is aligned, he puts on the muscle covering of the limb, as we have said, then he commands her to move back and forth; and when you have done this, make her sit in her seat, and command her to stretch; and she will sneeze.  
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to all the backbone
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner with the whole secondine, so cut the secondine at your finger, until the moisture is emptied; and if the infant can rise on its face and on its neck, then cut away from the bud, that it may not be held back, and let the infant die; then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to abstain at any time: then it will come out easily. 
de l’issue des gemelz	from the separation of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are strange and do not live, if they can be named; I know these, that they multiply, and are separated by the one who devises them, who is tied to the bud; and sometimes they come out as naturally as some others, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out violently, so the cure as we have said, and be the bandage subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make thus as it is worth to heal.  
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of their glorious sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all of them, because by chance something similar happens; so do according to what is necessary. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death; it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister the sheet from II parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist oils with musk of althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then oil the hands of the midwife with these oils and these muscillages; then put them into the womb lightly, then desire the place where she puts the pins that be suitable to those, and take ward if the child is appearing that it descends on its head; so put the pins in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, so put them or prickle and at the sides; and it is necessary that he hold the pin with his right hand, and put the curve between his two of the left hand, and put it to his whole hand lightly, and put the pin in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the pin:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then set against the other pin, or if you need it, the third one; so that the extractions are equal; and then move them equally on both sides, to move it easily, and let the pins be toothed to hold it well, as is shown in the form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains, he anoints the bail with some of his oil, and puts it in that part, and draws the other part; and if none remain, he places this on its own or higher place, and does so until it all goes out completely. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you should wrap it on the drape, until it is whole; then cut at the joint of the palm or at the wrist, and thus you should do to the other hand, and as II feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck in the issue, or it has a sharp chief assembled, then it befits you to put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the sharp; or you take it to the instrument which is called "almidach," so that the form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way, do if the infant has a large chief naturally; and then pull out the bones with pliers, and if the head leaps forward and is strained by force, then it must be split, as long as the moisture which is or worse issue; and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it befits that you pierce it until the moisture flows.  
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is estrous in the belly or in the breast, then it behooves you to draw it out with the drape wrapped around the hand; and make the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture there is cured; and if the other members are taken away, and the head remains, then put the bail his hand in through the marrow; and draw it until the mouth of the marrow; then put the oncine or II, and draw it out; and if the mouth of the marrow is contracted because of a hot abscess that has come there, then it behooves not to work it, but it behoves to administer moist and fatty things; and administer plasters, and such in soft and moisting water. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, follow what we have said about a living child; and if you cannot do so, then treat it by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it comes to the patients those that we have said in abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood flows, let it be placed in water restraining, and give them other treatments. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been stillborn, then conceived another on top of it, and refused the other life.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, it came to her an abscess in her belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began a great discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long about it, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed greatly because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and in my hands, I saw bones so that the woman was in a better place; and she lived for a long time like this, and it was coming back a little bit of bow from there; and I have not recorded this chapter further because for that reason, when the master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help.  
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to bring the bone back into its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the clamp, as we have found in the books; and to two turns at two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft should be large, and the edges of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same shaft, which are fastened on one and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the handle to open when turning the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, to its semblance more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the semblance of tongs; and have as II heads II adjustments, as you see, an arm's length long, and II wide; and when you see opening the mouth with all the instrument, so make sit the woman on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs open, then put the II adjustments adjusted together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then operate your hand to all the instrument, as you have done as tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all surmounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have appeared them, so much it is more hasty the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you do not have appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her arm, and then make her sneeze with condiments, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she sneezes because of this, it is good.  
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If the mouth is not open, then take a pot and make it pierced or covered, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the abscess, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, boiled or pounded in water over the fire; then put one end of the chain or pierced pot and the other end in the mouth of the abscess, and hold it until vapors come out inside the abscess; then make it sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part jumps hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure and is not worse, command the midwife that she moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in an ointment of althea, and then put it into the nature, and seeks the secondine; and when she will have found it, she takes hold of it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the hairs do not fall out at the extraction; but it is necessary to move it lightly to right and left, and then pulls; if it comes and unties itself. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marsh is closed and constricted, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, then guard that you do not apply to the milking; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marsh, that you tie it to the hip of the woman, then cleanse with ointment tetrafarmaçon; so it will become porous and return, and come forth; but nonetheless, when it becomes porous, evil odor comes to the stomach and head, and pales the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary then fumigations suitable to this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument which one uses to fumigate the woman at childbirth retention is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let the fumigation be upon the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burned, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	To examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by a subtle syfac: so it behooves the midwife that she pierce that syfac to its due, and she does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the lacement that she does not touch it; then put on a fleece moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment cure until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put in the opening a piece of lead, and let him lay still for a day, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this numbness comes from the closing of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closure; if it is cured, as we have said about the cautery of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and larger ones that come from near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if it is a fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it works, and again moisture arises white or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who there is excretion or ventilation when the patient makes an excretion, and by adventure in jumping a few. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if fistulas that reach to the bladder and halfway up the penis; and extend to the groin joint, and to the buttock.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing; and it is that you put your right index or base, and put a subtle needle of iron or steel in the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has tortuosity, put in a tent of fine lead or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your point; and if you do not feel it, and there is no coming out through emission or windiness or ver, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary tract, then urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes to the place; if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain around, it is that it is a bow there, and there is no ointment medicine or bandage for it; and in these fistulas piercing there is no cure except labor, and vanity of the fools' wonders who meddle with them. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one who is not too young and not too old, there is hope of health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of lead, or of wood if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the base, you must put your index finger there, and then feel if the tendon is perceived; and be discovered or you feel between your finger the soft tissue or the bone, then you know that it is pierced; if you do not feel it, one cannot cure it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can by any means heal well some, but this happens rarely; and the help that one does, if one gently heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and puts it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation; and do this II times or III, as long as you know that these false hairs are burned, which resemble an eye feather; and then cure with damp cloths in butter, as long as those chars isse, then cure with ointment sealing and welding. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If so it is healthy, then well. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this [wound/condition] cannot be healed otherwise; and if it is caught between and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of silk, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; so you cut from the beginning of the fistula and push forward beyond the tent, and then use the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then defuse those fleeces that seem like an owl's feather, and nothing remains. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sans [meaning unclear] vaints, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together II good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined cartilages, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of damp tents in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the cartilages are burned in the open; then cure the wound with soft dressings, bringing hard cartilage, and are the dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the base, and is removed from the body, then you put on your own skin or foundation, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there is the web or the syfac or chars, where it is close to piercing, if there is no other way except by hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and care as first; and do not let too much be done, that you do not cut the tenement that holds the foundation, and comes the egestions by its own will; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that cover and the world after it is cut from its foundation, or by tent or by other appointed instrument; then cleanse the char fautree which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: it will be a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies against the base below the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:  
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts one twisted thread into two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, as you put your finger or foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it be for a day or two; and restrain it no time, until the threads join those that are between two, and stick together; then cure the wound until it is joined and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make a lance for the fistula if it is too deeply embedded, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spittle spinal bone from which one makes the fistula is very much one part and trenches; and on the other part no, because for that reason one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, blood comes out, and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture, and yet it is or a little bit of citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, is that you command the patient to stretch himself to go to chambers, until the foundations issue out, and appear the threads; so hasten, and it can be with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots; and if the tweezers cannot hold it for its moistures, then take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and put them in your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that be in their place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, then cure the other cures until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot issue, then enema the patient with a sharp and pungent enema to wash out what is at the foundation, so that it can issue openly; since the patient is feeling better, and if the threads are outside the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you pick them up with your finger or with pliers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take I thread, and put it in a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so it be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave I for the correction of the superfluity of blood; then put on the foundation I cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put on the foundation, and command to the patient that he rest; and then leave him until it dries, and when they will be dry, cure them with ointment and other cures, until it is healed.  
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying of the veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not leave it to moisture; then treat it until it is healed as it should; and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping more strongly than before, until it heals well, and be scraped; then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	for trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formice is a small appearance made before the body, and goes much into it; and sometimes it finds it cold, and feels it also like dead fright, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than elsewhere. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane from an goose feather, or a vulture feather strong, and put that cane on the fremit, until the purple circles mark the fremit all around; then turn your hand on the whole cane until you cut all around the fremit, and put it in the middle, and scrape the fremit of its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this of a hound of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, but to keep at the two, and move pressing And if you see, so cauterize the groove, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time is made clister of silver or brass, or iron melted or meshed; and no time is made of these instruments small and great, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those which one administers in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a severance where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced inside; and on one of the sides II pierced, and on the other I; and the belly where one puts the medicines of a beast bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole I must have a space, then put into these holes I strong thread of thread spun crookedly in X or whichever way around, and assemble the belly like it is a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if one has the instrument before a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or with egg yolk, or with something similar, then put it in gently; then squeeze the ministers with his two hands together, until it is all visible, then withdraw the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to go out, so let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him with the sickness of a falling belly, and the medicine hastens to issue, so restart it until it is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, then the clyster be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is restrained. 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you guard yourself carefully that it is of a stone or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt heavily an abscess hot: so let the blood flow as soon as from the cephalic same even if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bloodletting on the contrary side of the affected part; and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and coarse meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be reduced, and he drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he has burned it, put on some ointment, until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together with tents, then bring them together with sutures, just as I shall say for wounds of the belly, by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a point, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked grain, also lentils, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a wound rotting and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw it away, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, then seize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which binds as soon as the wound has closed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for do not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time should one make this with only quicklime when they lack incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the herb has healed the wound, even if it is in a state, do not put this powder on it; but put some digested ointment, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it softens; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then I will extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you after this about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other means than to leave the cure, and put nothing restraining, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of this is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the medicine warm, like calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucum laved also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so stitch it and bind it with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is capped and full of bowe, then pierce or lower; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then cauterize, and stitch, and apply a bandage as the need is; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the keurs, and the duct is kept, by which the meat goes, then sew the heart on the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural figure; and then restrain it well, and leave it for some days, then cure with ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then fix it; and if there are pieces of bone, then treat them all as much as you can, and what you cannot have, then let it rot as long as the wound festers, and be cleared and aligned the exit; and if the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the powder that I said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance blow or a knife wound, and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there are windiness as the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder in the first hour, nor bind it tightly so that the blood does not stagnate and return to the heart, and kill the sick person; but put attractive ointment in it, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; so that there will not come any spasms, nor bad tremor of the heart nor constrictions of the breath; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Therefore, treat with tents and other dressings until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, and work, then know that there is a fistula; so treat the wound as one must. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then the cure of those who are in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and it has broken pieces, then cure the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound rot, so that it will lighten the extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs is judgment as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small; from a great wound sometimes the intestine or nerves of the intestines come out because of which the introduction of others; and sewing is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than a small wound because of which one puts the intestines back in more carefully, unless they put them back quickly into the heat; because that the intestine inflates as soon as they feel the cold, so they return more easily, and because of which the average wound is worse, because of which one must reset the intestine to its place than the others. And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners: the two common seams occur in the seam of the belly, and the seam of the other wounds of the body and two other special seams are common to other wounds; and nevertheless they are more common with the seam of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines has emerged, and it seems to be better to put it back, then it is done in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you boil in hot water squinting and cypress and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and sometimes do this binding, and move that only so as to deflate. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or wine and let it be cooked well, for by this is aligned the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cuts hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that it be cut that no one should cut it without great need; and this is the instrument for cutting: so trench within in the curve and outside not, and see here the form. 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has jumped out, put it back in according to its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, because it is good for healing. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put his head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to that the injured part be higher than the other; and thus you should administer what I say in great and medium wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Small wounds put what you have seen, then in your hands I minister pitiful that holds all the rupture with his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the chief of the wound I doe of space, and there stick a needle where it has I good strong thread; and pierce the II heads of the skin with the II heads of the siphac, which is below the skin inside, until you make it pierced on that side, and assemble the II chief of the siphac the IIII together; then the strain of a double thread around the needle of II parts, then assemble the II heads of the wound conveniently, and then leave I doe of space, and there stick another needle; then lie the thread as you have done the first needle, and do not cease from this to do according to what you need needles, until the whole wound is constrained; and let the needles be medium, between subtle and thick, because the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot well enter: for this reason it behoves that they be medium; and it behoves not to put the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, k’they do not cut and open the wound before the sewing; and then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not bleed the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or drapes on the heads of the needles for the mucus to keep, and leave them until the wound is sewn; and this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because it suffices a needle or II Li second stitch is common, and it is that you assemble the II heads of the skin and the II heads of the syfac together on a needle where it has I medium strong thread; and when you have pierced these heads toz IIII together, then pull the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner c’on sews the drapes; and put space between each stitch the thickness of a minor doe; this stitch is evident to the man, and I sewed a wound with one hom had or belly, which was navred with a knife, and was the wound more than a palm wide, and it was intestines well II palms wide, and it was the wound in the middle of the belly.  
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed until fifteen days, and I treated it, and it was healed.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mire had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where none were found, nor any medicines; and put half a sense more above the wound cotton twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the II proper manners of sewing: take the needle, and thrust it from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced the core straight through, lay the point down on the sheepskin or sew where you have put in the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave one part of the sheepskin one time, and take it back the other, until the sewing is completely done. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, as the Gauls say properly, is like any font, which assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one chief of the stitch to the other chief, in this manner: prick an needle or chief of the mirach prochiene, and make it pierce that place alone, and leave the two chiefs of the stitch; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part unto the inside, at the two chiefs of the stitch; then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part unto the inside, in two other chiefs of the mirach that are on the other side; and this is the middle manner of stitching and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galens says this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with II needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitch is more grievous than the others of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgements of the wound are such as the judgements of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh to all its blood, so long as the fire has cauterized it, then put back the intestine, and the wound; then put above the powder enchanting charcoal, and if the fire has cauterized it, then put above any ointment that be present, until the wound bows; and suck out the pus, and be soldered the skin, and the miracle; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, then put upon it, as soon as it begins to bow, old cotton, and move it II times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in several cases unless the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communion with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or rot in bowels, and many times happens, then give clisterize of black wine, and even if the rot comes to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called «jeun» cannot heal when it is ravaged, and that is because of the network of veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the probe jumps out of the wound, put it back as if the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned or black, then you should tie the part that is black, that bleeding may not come from there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the tie, and put the two heads hanging from below the wound up to outside in order to align the extraction when the probe falls, and the wound bows. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, in some men it can be restored, because I saw that a man was wounded or belly of a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became infected and became a fistula, and there he excreted and flatulence; I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to treat until it was healed, and the edges fused.  
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I see him healed, I doubted that the patient had badly in his belly; and there was no harm, but stayed in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and they said any experimentors that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take fremis to large testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the fremis has covered the mouth, so put it on the two lips, so that it strains its mouth up; and then cut the head, and this stays so that it cannot untie, then put the other fremit afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely grasped; and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief is burned in the intestine and causes no trouble to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast, in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is well stripped, and then tie it to the head of this fine thread of linen twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and wind it in the rupture; and this way of sewing of frims is not more than according to the way of fiance and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, there is nothing else but subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and even when it is closed and goes inward.  
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth knotted fault free and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also like the feather of a bird; and sometimes in clear bow, and other times thick; sometimes pock, and other times enough; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only because of one of the nine causes: it is to know, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, that does not let flesh be born; or there is too much bow; or the place is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and inflated by nature; or there are veins or bones; and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the syphysis, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so on that it comes to the property of the main member, and to the similar ones.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grief healing, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you want to know it, so take a tent of iron or tin, if the fistula is straight, so you will; and if the fistula is crooked, so make a circle with a subtle tent of lead, because the lead bends much around the crookedness; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then cliserize it by one of the openings, because the moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleans it; then you will search carefully in your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and if it is covered deep, and ask well the patient about the pain that he feels at the pressing of your hand, and where he feels it; and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have said to you, then operate according to what I have said to you, and remove the filth and rotten things that are inside; and then care for it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut as deep as you can, then put moist tents in medicine of vinegar, and put them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is deposited at the bottom; and then put a salves with healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by these, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, so cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat the king as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then cure the things in coming flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns as before, know that you are not well gone until the bottom: uncover and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.  
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too far along, that you cannot do anything about it; if there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you can draw it out with tweezers, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, then you must draw them all out, leaving none behind; and if the moisture prevents you, and there is no error or fear, then cut through the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound a thing hindering rot, and leave until the flesh around the bones is rotten, then they will more easily loosen; and if it is large bones, like leg or thigh, then restor so long as the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the bone's marrow; you must be careful and cover all until the corruption, then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the substances came to the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open; but the doctors by their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they flowed out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many holes came which all emitted pus and moisture from the body; and many doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what flowed out through the holes a great deal; and the young man's body became red, and he had a yellow color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore attacked it, and dug into one of the openings until I discovered part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came to the inner bone; I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but could not close it; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then tried to close the place; but I could no more than I dug into one palm of the bone, and it was broken throughout its length, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healed and closed quickly, and it did not need to begin again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of blood evacuation often but it was healed completely, and in the place of the bone a hard cartilage arose, and it was well disposed and had no inconvenience nor contrary in all things, neither to the going nor to coming. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a linen cloth, and strain it to the head of the bone which opens, and command anyone that he extend it upwards; and put another linen cloth thicker than the first linen, and tie it on the flesh which is above the bone, and stretch the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh in the place where you see it should be, that the bone does not pierce the flesh; and put a splint or a board under the bone to move the corrupted flesh; and must stay as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and stay another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole flesh; then put the ember underneath, and then thread from one side to the other the corruption, and let the thread be as long as the length of the corruption; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and thread the bone where it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to do than to cut; and if the corruption is in the heel of the hand or in the heel of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opens for you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you; and know that the instruments to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to equip yourself with each kind of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so therefore consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can be affected by internal or external causes; and when you have medicated that corrosion with the treatment of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the point where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs become black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; so haste to cover it, and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the arm, then cover it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, he cuts at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, he cuts the blade; and if it passes the blade, it is death, and there is no more treatment than the quantity of its virtue; and thus do all when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes on the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it goes up the leg, he cuts at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to die; and the way of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister to the lower ligament, and another minister to the upper ligament, and you sever the flesh which is between the two ligaments at a spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or saw, and put on each side a bandage of linen, so that the sawing does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient other lesion and abscess. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding comes when you operate, cauterize the place well, or you put some powders restraining on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the member injured with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his sole of the foot, until it seized the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover the foot, and it was healed; and long after that it returned the corrosion on the hand side, and it came to me, and I put on him things repelling after the cleansing of the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, that he would die, because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his country, and hurried to cover his hand, and it was healed; and I have this tale told only for those who might need it. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At no time comes an abscess in its fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels; and then they burst and pierce, and in jumping the bowel, and staying its vessels, as well as some vessels; and the skin which is above is also subtle as delicate drapery, and do not run up to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "sain" and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes up to the bone even by force, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so is that you cut that skin all around, and even when it is subtle, as well as some drapery; and does not heal for its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, so treat it with a clyster thus: look whether the breast is large, and the bowel which is within it is of foul odor; then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take asafoetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and clysterize into the breast, and restrain the anus; and leave the medicine inside for II hours, then withdraw it by straining; do this many times, until the breast is purified, and the stench is removed; and sometimes clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of grapevine wood, and pour water over it, then filter it, and clysterize with it, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the sick person cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey in which there is a pinch of pounded litharge; or clysterize with honey and sweet wine, because the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes it dry; and when you have done this, and you are convinced that the breast is well cleansed, then clysterize with what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take diaphana plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties or treatment of ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up leaving only the space where the clyster can enter, and if the opening of the breast which stinks is above, then cut it or lower the place where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in place, let it not be hindered by flesh; and if you cannot cover the breast as well as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow goes to the lowest point it is at, for when the bow is in place, let it not be hindered by flesh, and if you cannot cover the breast as well as you see fit, arrange it so that the bow goes lightly down, and let nothing of the bow be left; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stay on the linen cloth that covers the whole wound; then cut as strongly in the direction of the hole of the breast, a little wider than before; then put ointment beneath the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and the one that is on the hole of the breast, often remove to remove the bow, and know what comes out of the bow, if it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or indigested; and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is in such a manner spread and you see the nature that jumps on the wound of the breast, know that the breasts are already healed, and approaching health; and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed indigestion after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, if it does not despair thee of health, for health approaches.  
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and those who do the opposite; and if he has an indigestible lump from the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not heal well; and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are swollen, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafinit ointment, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and the same thing is better cooked honey when the diafinit ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue it to the breast, and put it on the breast; and sometimes administer a long aristolochia, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of verbena and centaury; and use both simples and composites: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is deeper, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard limbs, or in the limbs; so the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the ankle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance in other two; and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, there comes I the abscess swells, and runs and digs a bow until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes the whole; and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that there comes painful odor, and is the limb of the two wide, and is the color flux. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity that is remaining from the angle, then cauterize the wound afterwards. 
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to prick, and the flesh bleeds, then it is necessary that you put oil under the nail so that it does not press on the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut that flesh skillfully and lightly, and put above the remaining flesh medicinal substances hot and corrosive to remove everything; then cure with ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then you cut it, and treat it well, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal; and if you see the two [bones] corrode, then you cut it in I of us as it has been said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is broken, and beaten, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you first heal it; then cut the angle of the spatula sharp by cutting across above, and guard that the cutting does not come to the flesh which is under the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on top which soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the hand's source
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of us from the two.  
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any notch of the hip does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the hip, perhaps moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Whoever is born at the root of the joint, he is difficult to cure; so you must be careful when cutting it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be at the back of the nut, it is fitting that you cut first the flesh around to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this one, then cure it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The bandages that come to two together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you stitch together the suture, so that the parts repay according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of thin plank, until the joints are soldered, as it is fitting. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The joining comes to none of his two with the palm, if he copes that joining as it is fitting.
des vils	of evils 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large vessels enveloped full of melancholic superfluities, that come in more members of the body; and more happen in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than to others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging of colocynth, and then the healing of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is when you cut (it) and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and treat it completely. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this manner: first, raise the leg of hot water strongly, until the large vein is softened, then strain the leg of the sick person from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in I place, or II or III, with a wide incision, then lift and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, as long as much blood comes out as the virtue of the sick person can suffer; and then bind it up, and command him to stay on meats avoiding black food; and begin the evacuation and the bleeding again when the veins are full, and harm the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the leg is done in this manner: lay the leg of the patient down if there is a lot of hair, then put it into a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by fire, and then cut above the vein from the top of the knee to the bottom of the thigh, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with an incision, and scrape the vein on each side, until it feels apparent when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then put the point under, until it is lifted from the skin, and then press it onto the incision lightly, then cut it in another place three fingers above; then scrape the skin above the vein until it feels apparent, then lift it at the root, as you have done, and press it onto another incision, as you have done first; then cut another section, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the ankle, then treat and raise it up to the second section; then draw out in sections, until it is all drawn out, then cut; and if you cannot pull it and raise it, then put a needle through the thick double thread, and tie it and treat it, and put it under the point, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it comes out; and guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot pull or raise it, and it leads to nuisance to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put over the place of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved and does not cut, so it only cuts the vein; and is a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:  
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no grass or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of rot that comes beneath the skin, as it comes from inside the body from snakes and worms, enmeshed between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to come out as a root of a plant.  
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the bone of the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to II inches, and tie it, and leave the plank on the leg, and all times that it has point to the fire, so wrap around the plank, and tie it; and if it is too long, so cut off a part, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely out; for if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings abscesses and rot there, and bad illness; for that reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains on the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated from the palms of a length, or from X, and one hour came to me, who had it from X palms in length, and when you cut it, it puts I ray on the point, and pierce it to the bottom, so that all goes out; and be emptied the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing rot any day, then cure it as the abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein the hands rain, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, and there comes much of piercing, and from which it jumps rains; cure therefore as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms which are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land “disease of the ox”, because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the border of limb to limb, as long as they go through the skin where it goes, and jumps out; and is engendered by rot of some humors, as come worms and serpents and embers and ascarides in the belly; and doubt is had of its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him cure and treat, one cannot force it except when it goes: so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong band tightly, then cut on top and pull the fur out, and if the root is too deep in the skin, and you don’t find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, then hold below it the eyebrow firmly formed, then cut on top, and pull the fur out; and it is necessary to use the patient with cleansing of the body of medicines solutives for the humors of evil, and avoid meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if living silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was returning towards the body, as I saw her. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed greatly how she moved so from limb to limb, because I have never seen this sickness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have wanted many who had well moved pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins uncovered, and because of this appeared that constraint windiness; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this malady, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then lie down above and below carefully, and then cut up until the constraint of wind is in its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure with those who expel the winds, such as fetid pills, and seraphin pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that some have large points and small ones, and hairy, and smooth; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one which falls on any member, it falls in two ways: or on the principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.  
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: then it is necessary that you abstain from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not yet completely embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the syvfac which is above the brain, it is when scotomia and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without fuer from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound moisture white seeming to poultice, and jumps also like burning of flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then hold yourself from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were tied in a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the seventh moves as well as the hand, and in short black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: know then without doubt that the death will descend. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the saette that never moves is that without plains of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and moves all the members from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perchance it leaps out of the wound something undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and leaps out no point of straw through the gut path, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaks out and comes outside, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and the similar members, are saved according to more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason that you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that went into the root of his nose: I took it out, and pulled it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it was cured without feeling anything. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And treated with an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye under the paper, and the arrow was removed, and could only touch the tip toward the shaft, and the arrow was large as a turquoise arc, all iron light without ears; the game was unharmed, and he did not suffer any bad accidents. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And treated an arrow in the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and carefully until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.  
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treated an arrow in a man, who it was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die; and then when he had passed XXX days, he did not change his disposition; I cut on the arrow, and removed it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.  
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has an arrow that fell into his body or back and the wound was stitched up; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural positions, nor finds annoyance in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see I another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn together; and he remained so suffering great pain; and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow in the body of the prince the king, which was lodged between his ribs, and was a little tilted towards the right side; and the arrow was whole, and I was called to treat it after three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound was very tight. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it as a whole thin tent, and I felt nothing at all; and he felt prickling and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put a poultice on top, astringent and digestive, for that reason the wounds didn't swell; and the wound from the arrow appeared.  
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the splint on his hand for several days, and sewed up the wound directly, and he stayed like that for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his knee; and he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine corrosive of water by hand for days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow that was hardening in its place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that medicine corrosive, until the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly; and it passed well the ends for IIII months, and then opened the wound so that I put tongs in it, and mine on one side and the other, and it could not go out; therefore I did not cease to subtly work and devise ways of instruments, until I took I day the tongs well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the wise men judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I therefore restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed completely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take everything; but the wise masters compare on very little thing, and on those that are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of foreign things that happen in this art.  
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are not in the limbs where they are lodged except according to two ways: either by their entry point or by another part; and that one which is lodged by the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and that is never the case now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, let it be left until the wound is entirely closed, and let it be moistened; and if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot come out, let it be left so for some days, and moisten it each day; and then when it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around it to all the forest fine, until the skin around is enlarged, and then treat it.  
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not draw it out, but let it stay until it is equal after a few days, because if the arrow comes to such a place, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and does not come up to the skin, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then the engine of the treatment. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply stuck and cannot be pulled out, then administer poultices as I told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body, and if one cannot see it, then search thoroughly throughout the entire tent; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot by the tightening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then flay as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow to what it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out; and be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you pull it out more roughly.  
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then bring it up until the joint is warm, then treat it, for the extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding goes against you, administer those that we have said in their chapter; and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put engine however you can move the arrow safely, soon or late, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest aid that there be, and if you cannot do so, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one does not see or feel anything of it, or the skin is swollen in the place so that if one sees or feels apparently: then cut there, as much as the pliers can take, and then extract it: if it jumps now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it for now, and then begin the extraction again until it is drawn out; and if the shaft is inside, push it with all your strength; and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer a thrust, administer the instrument as far as it goes so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then thrust, and if the arrow is stuck, push the instrument back in at its entry point, in order to facilitate the extraction.  
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is surrounded, it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then cure the wound as is fitting. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or at the bladder or at the rib and it is close, and you can cover over it, if you should cover over it; and guard yourself from covering over the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound, if it is necessary; and take care of it until it heals.   
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an eye beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the cutting head is like that of an bird's feather, for thrusting at the tip of the arrow, as here it is the form: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for inserting and holding is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there is XVI head, that is to say: II batans which are after the ears, which are called the two «herbech»; and the II arteries which are in the II temples appearing; and II veins that are in the II tear ducts of the II eyes, which are called «aspires»; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the chief of the neck; and the II veins which are in the neck; and the II veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called «augeherich»; and II veins that are under the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly opened are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the fossa, and it is the one that is opened which opens manifestly above the elbow. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the sap vein is the one that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two veins; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the pocket of the left side; and the second one called sophene which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called 'ness', which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the bleeding, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck with a bandage, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their dependencies from the head: then put your hand, and where you feel the pulse below your hip, give it a slight blow; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein upwards, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers wide, and make blood flow out as much as you see; then tie it up and keep it tied until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for old migraine, and sudden, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of the tears sharp to the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeding are as I say: and it is that the patient restrain his neck, so long as the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your right hand, then sign in him; then raise the heart above the vein on your right index, and put the lancet below, and raise the vein up, and the cup, as you have done in the other veins, and make a cure of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; and then form the ligature, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about it and its treatment and its extraction, as begins the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the front forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for ancient face ailments, and for migraine, and for blushing; and its qualities are that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fuser", whose form is here: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never open it with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not right that the flames be too thick; and to heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the II veins that are in II tear ducts helps the eyes, and the ear, and the cheekbone, and to the canal in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their blood is that the patient strains his neck by twisting with any linen, as before; then the vein, and whether the vein is through a point of length of flame a point wide, because there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fine, it may break; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein from the nose is good for ague, and for sore throat, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes a fine long thread, and puts it into the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too deep in the incision, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up at night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the thread:  
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the II  [a unit of measurement] helps in the treatment of the alaigne [possibly a type of bone or joint ailment], and at the beginning of meselerie [unclear medical term], and many diseases, and scabies, and corrosions, and herpes, and estiomenes; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient straitens his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein of the long one well, then draw the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary; then do the same to the other vein, then untie the linen, and constrain both veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until the morning, that the wound be healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the blood of the levers 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the lips from above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and to wounds and sores.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is to the right lip and the other to the left, and know them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: therefore cut both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also do with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is to the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bleeding are that the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein: so bleed one and the other, and do not let them go too deep, because below are the arteries.  
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut from which one commonly heals are healed according to two manners: or they prick at all the flame martin wide, or olive subtle like cuts trenching, and is called "ane sil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is need to open the veins  with clear blood that is apparent and contains thick blood and troubled; and this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for opening veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly; and it befits the healer that he drains skillfully, and that he keeps himself from the artery that is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it strikes the ground, and a flow of blood comes, then you must cauterize it, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricking but cutting like an anvil.  
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you should constrain it, and change another; or you wish no vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein removing the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cut to the flame is healed, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you draw out the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then sign the place with a knife, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the inflamed flame; and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflated, for it is from the artery: avoid therefore.  
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upward like the urine of a child, and the vein is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: haste yourself then, and place your hand lengthwise upon it, then remove your hand if the vein is still throbbing; which many times happens. If the limb is swollen, and leave it so, and do not move it to the patient; and be in fear, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stained, and it weeps, and the medicine is not present, then cover the artery if it opens, for the head of the retraction; and stain the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a cork of pistachio, and make it, and take one of the halves and tie it on well until the other day; if it stays in place, that is good; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; and the stanching is not grieved in more dispositions for the small place of the wound, and the tightness of the linen of the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle helps so that it draws blood from the head above and from the body below, for this reason, it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and the surgeon must place himself in order to the nerve which is below, and if it is not too far apart, he finds the nerve, and he inflames it and the saints are pricked, and by chance, it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in certain men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel the vein with the instrument again; and escape the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make a cut along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head is so helpful that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed them with a pointed olive flame or a myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have tendons or nerves or arteries. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not grieve if it must be done the first time, and one begins again; and by chance swells the limbs in some men, when one tries it the first time, but it does not grieve.  
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The qualities of blood are according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting, is that bloodletting is administered only to preserve health and to ward off diseases to come; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: that is to say cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent on a Friday, and in autumn and winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears; and one must bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three days. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses does not have a determined hour, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in every time; and it is not proper to bleed children until XIV years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not bleed the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some want to bleed, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw in the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members; nor should one bleed who is too fattened with meats, nor who is drunk, as long as he is so, nor those who are dropsy; and if it happens after colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of labor in woman, and childbirth, and vigil, and fasting, and any of those things that total virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body; then subtilize the humors, if his blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the skill for it; then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein of the arm near the elbow, as we have said; and keep yourself free on that day from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be lying and joyful, and let the one who bleeds be higher than him who bleeds, and rub the arm two or three times, then pull back the bandage halfway, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; then moisten the bleeding point with a drop of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand on that vein below the elbow about an inch where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not move and fail during the incision. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that are like cords to the vein-drawer, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if it opens the vein, the wound is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the vein-drawers be aware of these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it is restarted once more a little below where it was or above carefully, if the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient fears it, let him leave it for one or two days, and bind his arm not: perhaps there will come boils in its place; nor enter into water baths, then re-begin the bleeding if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the vein is too fine and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, pierce again in that same wound straight to the entire flame; and work one point gently, so that the limb is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place inflamed, do not start the bloodletting again, and put on a bit of oil, because it will calm the body of blood, and is mixed in this place with the oil; and thus administer the oil to each wound that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing heals triacle and borage, when one puts it on the place; so subtly does it reduce swelling and separate it when it is too big. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess, which happens often, even when it is not drained except for the time that the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and some hot oil, and restrain it for one hour; and you must do this after the blood has come out of the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on any thing of aloes or frankincense mixed with juice of calamine, mustard, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearance at the saint's basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft at the compression of the hand, then is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, I advise you that you do not put upon it anything of what we have said, because perhaps a vein lies within; but make one dry plaster to harden the place, then cure with another cure, until it be healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it drain until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it shrink until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who is fat and full, and needs the extraction of blood, one makes a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed little and often, and one must bleed by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from the decrease of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than the bleeding through long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body is weak from bloodletting, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, treat him with blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, put softened bread before the bloodletting in quince syrup, or in honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it bleeds at the vein, after the evacuation of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of flesh and fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of veins. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed other times if necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he should bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to be bled from another place, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body that has already become hot and causes fever; so it is necessary to milk a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as it falls into pieces of bread; then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his arm while he heals, that death does not come in the place of pieces of bread, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it does not suit when you see to untie the arm, and make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly; nor if it is curved, that he extends his arm too much, for that would be bad; but let him rest as long as he heals the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on top of a piece of gauze back in shape, and press lightly.  
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need to draw blood for the second time, let it heal in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein from which blood is drawn from the arm is located near the vein of the neck because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the bone is red; then it should be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then it is lanced through, not too wide nor too long; and let the opening be large, and lance well near the joint of the hand, and if one cannot withdraw blood, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood to collect in the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back into hot water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer; and the lancing of this vein is safer of all other veins, because there are neither arteries nor nerves. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The vein of the savior of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it completely, it does no harm; and do not go too deep in the puncture, for the nerves are below all covered with skin, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot exit. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on top of the vein to close it well, and do this with each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of the left hand is good for the disease of mice, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophorene is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and hips and old legs, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs upon the vein until it perspires, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rains; heal therefore whether larger rain, or at the ankle, which is more valuable. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you drain it on the foot, guard the nerves which are below, and drain it by traversing as when cutting; and let the flames be anethesing.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot draw out blood from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein be emptied well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sutures are required for the first time, redo them a second time above by a little, because the skin is salty; and do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same with the splint from the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of fury, and its incision is worth for the pain of the hip when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his vein are such that the patient enters into a bath and is restrained above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you cleanse the vein in all ways that you can, and across; and it is better that you cut it than that you let it remain dry, because the place is dry, and she is much filled with a lot of blood. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, search for any vein that opens or back of the foot, and toward the small thigh, and guard the nerves; and make as much correction of blood as you see, and then untie the band, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of  suction cups healths 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Windsucks are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is to be done with fire is according to II manners: or it is all fire, or without fire; and cupping which is done by striking and by extraction of blood, is done in XIIII places of the body, so that one is all in the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others in II ribs of the neck; and the cupping below the chin; and the cupping on the II shoulders; and the cupping on the hips; and the cuppings between the II arms; and the cuppings on the II legs; and the cuppings on the II ankles; and cupping does not treat of blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken anyone, as one does with bleeding from a vein; and it is not necessary that it should be administered, neither all fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all of the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bloodlett, or for customs, let us bring them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time; for there are some who when they have need to bloodlett, have heavy head; and there are those who feel fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are some who dream, and see by blood and wounds and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is emitted during the month, we command to vomit after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the muse helps the heat of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is not proper that those who are of cold complexion use it, or who have a cataract, because it does much harm to them; and for this reason, it is not proper that the elderly use it, nor those who have or heads cold diseases. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are healed by it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windpipe brings the neck to the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and because of this it is good for the treatment of the lung, and for cutting the channel of the heart, and all, and for inflation; and it is necessary to put a little bit in, because if it holds too tightly, it causes obstruction in the stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the II ribs of the neck is good for headaches and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the vein of the basilica; and you must command the patient to stretch his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery, and there will be no running of blood. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventosation below the chin is worth against diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The bleeding of the veins is as valuable as that of three veins in the arm because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to have them pierced too deeply, because the vein is bare of flesh, and close to nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases of the bowels, and it should be large and of iron so that it needs to well suck; and by chance if it were thin, it would break; and there will make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cupping glasses of the legs are sucked open well, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the joints; and they are placed in the place of the two shins, and of the two ankles, but all the same they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of placing the cupping glass is that you put it first empty, and suck moderately, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from this doing until you see the skin red and inflamed, and appear the flow of blood; then fix, and replace the cupping glasses, and take heed to the disposition of the body, because there are those who have thick flesh, and porous skin: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a poke deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to prick it two times; the first time to make a subtle way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only make one incision.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we often start again; and if the vein is thick, we make it thicker, and the end is that the veins are pierced deeply, and it is necessary for someone who has thick and hard skin and who has thick pores, that you oil their leathers with a perfumed and dissolving ointment: if it is in winter, with violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in summer, with cress oil, or lilies, or chamomile, or something similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom one heals has tender skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on it, but after the washing with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, let him rise from rosemary, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities raise themselves from old wine, or from water of their own, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others like; and it is not proper to bleed with leeches before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or II; and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is proper that he should warm himself, when he must be cupped and when he is cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard him who is recovering is choleric, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; then it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the meal, and similar things; and minced veal, and meat of mutton, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quince fruits and small onions and pigeons; and the day that he will be purged, he must drink more than eat; and it behooves to give some men once triacle or musk before purgation, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let it be subtle, but it does not behoove those who are hot to drink it.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are put on without harming are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the bladder and the hips and the hip, because these members do not suffer being injured on themselves, and one does it only to draw blood from member to member, as we put them on the nipples when the milk comes in; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the bladder to reduce the limb; and to remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the operation, or dislodges the stone from its place; and so does it when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only so much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and some times full of warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for that.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two sides wide and half a palm across, and has or cost side in the middle of small opening, as for putting a needle, and be of iron, soft before so that she does not burn the patient when placing on the limb; and has in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a burning candle, and be big and small according to the maladies and the age of those who take them; for the cupping glasses of children are other than old people, and thin ones than fat ones. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus place this suction cup on the limb: take the candle of wax or linen thread, and put it inside the suction cup through the tube that is inside the suction cup, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and the pads should be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes in, and one removes the suction cup; and take the linen thread as before, and recommence often, if you need.  
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, for all acute, has no handle nor pointed, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is put on the member just so; and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Wounds are not applied except in members where one cannot put suction cups for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar; and in their naked skin, such as two or nails, and other similar things; and the qualities of the user is that when you find wounds that are in clear sweet water do not put them in, take them; and put them in a nut in sweet water, until they are famished, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cured from vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the wounds on top; and when they will be full, and fall off, if it is where one can put a suction cup, then put it on them, because it is worth a lot after.  
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, raise the part with a finger, and then with water, very well, and then bandage it; if the skin comes back too soon after the wound of the flesh, then put a cloth of linen in cold water, and put on top, until the flesh is extended; and if the wounds are multiplied, put on top vitriol powdered, or alum, and similar things, until they are extended; or you put on the spot half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry on the spot, then it will stop now; and if you need more, take other bandages.  
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the stitches do not want to take, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you put a needle there until the stitches come out, and then put them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden; and when you see that they are sticking, powder on a pinch of alum and silk ground, or ash, they will now hold. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is concerned with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear child, that the fool looks at this chapter, that he has never seen in any old book, nor read any letter; and for this reason is the science estranged in our land, because I have never found any good; and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have shown you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are made ready, as I have done in these II chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say here in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise place his understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or child, or elderly; or if their temperature is not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, namely cold baths, and meat of lamb and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubts about a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his former governance that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and tripe of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment they recover strength and more quickly the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones broken of the old and decrepit cannot well rejoin or weld according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, as the bones of small children; but do not worry, set on the broken bone the large tendons that harden and join the limb together, so much that it forces as it was before; and for all points of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish them with large meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or the thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go awry, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner has its tool, and its instrument proper in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes in its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by that which the parts are twisted, and opens well by outside, and feels to the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torsion nor son at the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no point of fracture; but it may well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you should not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it carefully.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in a bundle, and are the II parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together evenly, so that abscesses do not come; and if abscesses come, let him leave none for a day, until the abscesses are appeased; then put it even at the joints as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is lighter than the restoration of this one where there are pieces; then restrain, as it is fitting here after. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in pieces, if it is two parts, if it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and to your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you rejoin all the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no lesion nor pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.  
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well; if the dress beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient not to move it, neither while watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the limb be so assured that he feel no pain.  
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except at a point, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and guard that he be put straight, so that tortuosity does not come into it when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to envelop them with cloths of linen soft and subtle; and those which are large, such as hips and thighs: so it is necessary to envelop them in a broad and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole great member, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no lack; then tie around bandages light, III tours or IIII according to the member, and restrain your hand a bit to the whole bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain less, that the fracture then distances a bit the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you feel most of the healthy part, then take I other bandage, and turn around back straight on the fractured part; then rise again to the lower part of the fracture, and restrain moderately, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first hour above; then put between the bandages of linen or cloths, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, place upon it a soothing, hot poultice that removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days; then apply to the stitches, and let them be half the width of a common cane well-shaped, or from wood used for making staffs, or from palm branches, and be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts upon the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it is suitable for the limb of small or large size; then bind upon the splints as you have done in the first hour, then tie above with thread evenly, as in the first hour upon the fracture; more tight above, less below; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I want works from fools who do their bandages with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it is not suitable that there be between each splint less than two fingers' width of space. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore in the joints of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy places, then put under them pads of linen or wool felt, so that it does not turn blue.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the crushing, and the bones are broken, I will tell you its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to bind all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, it is not proper to put splints for after V days or VII, or more according to your surety of an abscess happening; and see here the manner of the ancient plasters to restore a fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour that stays on the sides of the mill, and confis it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture at more dispositions, and even to women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three parts each of amber, laudanum, henbane, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into a powder, and mix it with plenty of egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of poultice that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana X; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII; acacia VI; Armenian bole X, and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of  plastering joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that arises, and the tailor uses it for bone splints, and fractures: Take new wool, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, cooked, and put it on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removing pain. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of poultice for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remaining of the abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of quince, of each one part; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is frostbitten, boil it with coriander water or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of setting a bone more forcefully than the first, when a hardened abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of willow herb, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind it, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ipocras states in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only a certain made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and a little hot, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and chevolz [likely referring to a type of herb] of oxen cut, or feathers of owl, and vismalve [possibly a type of plant], and seal in equal measure, and grind them, and make it into a plaster and apply.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the you untie a little after, and take care that if the patient does not feel any pain, or has moved the bones from their place; if not, do not untie it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then haste, and untie it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest an hour, then put a dry linen cloth, softened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a nut, as long as you are sure of a hot abscess; and rest the inflammation of the member, and be removed the pain, then begin again the subtle bandage, and a little plaster, and do not restrain it so tightly as before; and subtilize until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and the pain and swelling are gone from all of it, and you need ointment and binding, then recommence it, as you did first initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said, do not unbind it before III days or IIII or V or VII; and no time leave it XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the adjustment of the bone above; therefore bind it more than first, and thicken its flesh as I said before; and if you see it drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; arose then the warm water bath, all times that you unbind it, and this every third day, and stir a little the broth; by this work thus shortens the nourishment to the limb, and mends quickly what fools do, that remaining the limb twisted: this is bad, and so is dangerous work, and I see no other thing than to let it and work rightly. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures are there, and various figures, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the sifac which is under the bone, as haiche or fust does; and for this reason, this kind of fracture is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword chops the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impact embedded, or splitting or of the collarbone, or of the heel on bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone as subtle as a horsehair, and is the fissure small, and for this reason is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound which is made either by striking of stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of the bone down, and is the place hairy like the blacksmith when he fire on the cauldrons; so enters between the pieces within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or chiefs moist bones, such as children's heads; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated from them such as stars; and I will speak of it in its place.  
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry into tents, and by the corrupted cartilage that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs it above, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes becoming redder and more inflamed, and other similar signs in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unfavorable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accident we have said comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and that you prick the head of the patient with care, and uncover on the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound as much as you can, and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, put a poultice where it is necessary, and fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the poultice has calmed down, and be sure of the bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow edge in front, and this is the shape: 
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put .i. other cutting larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of cuttings of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron. And in work lightly, that you do not cut through the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce it below, so that you administer chisels with drill bits, lest they go beyond the bone; and it must have above its point a rim or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary that you have several of these, so that each comes in its place from the width of the bone, so that you have drills for all types of bones; and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing below a broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a little afterward, and do this all around, then cut with the cutting tools the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have such as pliers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is remained from the bone to all the other instruments resembling a chisel, but it is necessary that it be more tempered and more subtle than the other chisel; and if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, so the oste gently with the instruments; then cure the wound of tents and dressings as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galien says, which is drier; and the load very hard, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lens-shaped instrument, from which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and is the piece sharp in II sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the skin that is below; if it is adhered to the bone, gently remove it, for it is best removed without pain, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble those asperities, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to its disposition; and this thing is not returned to him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, then it behooves you to take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not burden the wound, then administer from above another bandage, and do not bind it too tightly except for as much as to hold the wound alone; and leave it thus one or two days, until the abscess has calmed; then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powdered vetiver, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it upon the wound, and further administer medicines without biting; and watch that the wound be always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, nor allow any crust to gather, for when a crust gathers upon the skin of the brain, it will rot and cause great harm to the patient; for when one places upon the wound something biting, it will fester upwards. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take guard therefore, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blackening does not come from outside but only from the medicine that has been placed on it, if it has virtue, then you must take a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and glue one cloth with it and put it on the ulcer; then cure it in ways suitable for healing until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the bone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it be forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it behooves you to put your little finger or the pointed end of a needle into it, and set that fracture inside your index finger, and on the palm outward, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and it cannot come to its place, then you should put it equal to the head of a stick, a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of II parts, make another like it, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has subsided, then bandage to the chief of the two tents of linen drapes, if the fracture is in one part.  
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the making of a poultice with egg white and ground cumin; then leave the bandage until the bones are set and the cartilage hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at times one puts down goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is one-half a cloth draped over it, and the wound is held and the patient is breathed upon; or do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the wound as you work on it, put a piece of cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in one part of aqua regia.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind it much at all; and if the fracture of the bones is small, and they are broken into small pieces, you will take them out with appropriate instruments for this, then stitch the fissure, and cure it with things that make flesh grow, and bind it, like plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if it has no wound inside at all, you cure it with a tent, and put bundles of wool in it, until it is healed.  
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outward, and is not broken in two, except for splintering inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand outward, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put upon the broken jaw cerote, and put upon one double cloth; and put upon the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or sesame flour, after that which you have removed the cerote; and put on light cloth above the plaster, and if the plasters dries, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is sound; many times it is sound in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, then administer that which we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward that no piece of the bone is removed; so subtly of the removal as the instruments suitable to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on i.  plaster suitable to this, in order to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks many times before the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is then when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor defect.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be large according to your necessity; and being and light the bone, and restrain the sphere to your hand, so that you put each fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes in its way, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back and put under the shoulder one-half hour, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split above; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any tightening, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard the syfac:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not yet hollowed, and be as wide as it requires, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and it has handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrower, as is the opening of the wound that you have made when treating the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cover the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then apply the wound with cloth and bandages, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, moisten one drape in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The constriction of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put upon the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of yolk of egg, and put light bandages above, and put a spear under the saddle, if you have need; then take a very wide band of a palm wide, then put I drapeil double above bandages, and the plaster; then take a splint subtle of III thumbs wide and long, and envelop it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage be hanging; and put the splint upon the fracture, and turn the bandage upon the neck, and under the good saddle, and under the bad saddle; and tighten each part, and when you see that the band holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the splint does not move above the broken bone, so reward it every day, and when the bandages loosen, so restrain it; and make the patient lie upon his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the saddle, to raise the shoulder high; so will lighten the fracture of the force by the lightening of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless bad accident comes, until XX days; then renew the plaster, if you see that it has need, and restrain and leave it thus, as long as it is restored; and she is restored at most in XXVIII days, and in fewer in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	There are times when the shoulder is broken or wide apart in the middle, and it feels only with touch; if you fit the apparatus according to the figure of the fracture, and set it back according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on top of the place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put above a double cloth; then put above a broad and thin plate, a little broader than the shoulder, and if the plate is fastened in any place of the shoulder, so use the thread of lin bandages so that the plate lies equally; and then bind it tightly with a very firm bandage so that the plate does not move from its place, and watch the line each day; and every time it softens, bind it, and put back equally the plate if it is out of place, and lie the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that easily goes out.  
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes outward before and not below the shoulder joint, do it like this, and apply the bone, and make what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.  
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in pieces, then it declines to the below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and thirst, and perhaps vomit blood, and the veins open in the broken bone, and he feels them well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and he joins the sides of the two bones with his hands, and subtly brings them together in every way that he can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put bandages and bandages above the thin skin of salt, or some other light paste, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it over the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it well, and watch every hour the ligature, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten and loosen it, and clean what has come there with methods of treatment; then put the bandage back on, and tighten it until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put the fracture equal, as it is fitting.  
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the splint on, and restrain it with a strap if you need it. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and besides sharp pains, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is of serious illness, and the ancients have put great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which inflate the belly, in order to drive the wind out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then treat it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one should put suction cups on the area to draw out fluids strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup draws out the superfluities at the place for the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said one of you should cover the place with a soft wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the air equal, then be cured from the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer from the bone that pricks the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put below an instrument to ward off the syfac; and then one must carve the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on it soft cloths in rose oil, and place upon the top; and cure as long as the spot of the wound, where it is required for the abscess, and lie sleeping carefully upon his side or where he should, until it is healed.  
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they move and feel well when they are pulled and held still, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given to it. 
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take heed if the legs are soft, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and ejection without will; and when one places it on its belly, then there is ejection without will. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is healed on its back and it wants to sit, it cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its cure. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, as long as it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover it with the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure with an ointment that encourages flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do it again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, if it had not been for a little weakening at the head; and making long, and declining to the sides, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and throbbing, and swells what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the form of it; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put equal that fracture, as long as it is in natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it even, put it on the plaster, then put a support of wood or of kerf, and restrain the splinter so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs, until the splint is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and restrain it as it should, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one staff of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two heads with two bands, and raise them up, and make the patient sit on one seat; then place his broken arm on the staff, until it comes to the armpit, and has a bend of staff in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or ministers extend it downward; then put the fingers of your hand together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one length, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forward, restrain the limb below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its side. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one linen in between the seam, and the other towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put the linen gently, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and on the outside; then place the fracture equally, as it is necessary, and restrain it, if a boil does not come.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess does come, do not bind it until .vij. days, and put on linen half in oil and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed; then bind it, and the manner of binding it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents you, or if the bone is not set.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture .iij. two on each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less far apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seating of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the binding, that prickling nor swelling does not come to the place, or the sores may not come to the limb for because it is too strange. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the direction, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of such accidents comes, so he does not untie it before III days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and puts under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and watches each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or is softened the ligaments; if he treats it by the virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat that we have before put, in such a manner that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be gross. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken back in forty days after all; and therefore one must untie it and administer bath and medicines of healing to bring it back to its place.  
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is bad and entangled, it remains to untie for one or two months. 
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «foscile», because one is small, and that follows the shoulder; and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little hip; perhaps breaks the big foscile alone, or the small, and perhaps andui together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grieved than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently stretched and set straight. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great fossa, then it must be pulled more strongly; and extend it above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other ones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the part below his hand, or on the limb, and one other minister on the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors even, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, so put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, then glue a drapelet of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it not be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the drapelet above subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the surgeon takes out the cerote and puts the plaster of the mill powder with an abundance of egg on it, then put the splints, and let the splint of the break be at the most forward side, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have VI splints or arms in more dispositions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or two; and restrain more above the break than elsewhere, and all days less far away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the drapes that are on the splint be soft and moist, and not be hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itchings are appeased; and let the limb not be entirely rested. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, if the address. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave so for several days, until the numbing corrects, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, do not loosen him until 20 days.  
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or when the shoulder is injured, then put the hands to the neck and let the neck be straight, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on the back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and to us of the two there happen few fractures, and it comes only but bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it befits that the patient sit crossed, and be straight before him equally; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the ministers the bones broken, and put them equal the mirrors, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in .i. sheet of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the palm toward the belly of the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient that he tighten it to his broken palm; and then the restraint of a long cloth, and be the splint of thick wood as large as the palm of the hand, and the restraint, as it befits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the outside, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and bandage the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the two hands, if it is a sprain, set it straight as it should; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and not move it; and if the fracture is in the other hand, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy hand that follows; or tie them all together in .i. holding, which is better, or put a splint on top, like a sprain; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the hot, dry abscess, and correct what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus, one above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his back, then extend each minister his limb evenly; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one ligature should be placed towards the groin, and the other ligatures below the fracture. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and then be the ligaments close to the knee, and be the extension down; then put the hands the bone equal with its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if an abscess does not come. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and your cure; the bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a hard bandage doubled in II or III, and keep the excess, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put I long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and make the chief of the thread go upwards; then turn up the leg and up the thigh the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then use the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to tie firmly III turns or IIII above the fracture; and as much as you go higher than the fracture, and less constrain it; then hold as II chies of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and in tie III splints that are on top, then return downwards to the chief of the thread, until you come to the foot; and constrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there is neither abscess nor swelling nor any other sign. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to put them together, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the space open, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no times is broken the hip in this way that one puts splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, with this restoration made it does not cause pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the fracture is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there happen many breaks, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer just a crack, or a perforation, and it happens to all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels well known. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is as follows: it is made equal to that which is broken in its two parts, until they are assembled as much as possible; then put the splint, and on it a round piece of wood, if you have need, and bind it as necessary, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things;  and apply to each accident what is fitting, until he be healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called right "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and it has all the same fracture as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every way. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the smaller bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and it is well seen; and turns downwards. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer extension, and set it even, and bind the bones evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are more parts, that the extension be less and lighter; and the bandage according to your virtue. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have accomplished your work, take two pieces of wood that reach the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards; then wrap in two lengths one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture the leg cannot decline to right or left, and thus it is well; and no one administers one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly made in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come sometimes fractured and to the two bones, and there have been only a few cases in more dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there comes the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlap each other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, then put now your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return in their places; then put the plaster and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at .ij. finger-widths wide, then restrain the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped cloths around, and other things which you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, return them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one point wider, then put under the foot that table that I said, and strain it well; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it stay on the top of the table above the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and secure each accident as it is fitting.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, she makes her sit enlarged, then inclines her to the part of the back, and holds it behind; then fill the basin of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as you like; then turn over the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then throw the cotton out, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the belly; and when she wants to pee, she removes the cotton, and when she has peed, put it back, and do this for VII days or more: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie to the opening a string, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the string, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand of the man or the woman is broken, it is restored like we have said about the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and effort into it, and reads my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture, it signifies more than one method of restoration: therefore, listen. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and put it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then the retention of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes to you, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident upon it.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it gently in place with your hands, little by little.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not available for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which is .vii. or .viii. long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the smith that he forge .iii. or .iiij., according to what he needs for each case of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend at the compression on the limb in your work, and let it be acute in front and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the bone head be put on top of the visible bone; and push at once, as long as it returns, and be equal one against the other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so long as the instruments have purchase. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incision or saw, to your power; then remove that which remains in the bone of asperities and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black balsamic wine, and properly if that is what it is; and put nothing on the wound cork or anything else where there is oil, so that it does not cause decay and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times foolish people have done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corrosion any time; and let the strainings be softer and less than the other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not happen, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put on steles; but wrap around, instead of steles, hard cloths, and tie them.  
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the wound to bulge, so remove that which you have put upon it and all wine, and there put ointment healing wounds, such as ointment tetrapharmacon and similar. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is joined and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a manner that the bone aligns gently downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the next day it does not join more and returns back askew, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it behooves you to cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before.  
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the hip or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, do not treat it, because many times death comes from it, but let it be as it is until it dries; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils which come out of the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the members their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if it administers topical medicines like aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, as you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stimulating wine or with egg white or with a mixture; and put them on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not loosen it for days; and then release it, and begin another one, until the swelling is gone; or you strain it on a piece of wood well made; because the properties of the wood are that it removes all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity appear; or you reapply it to any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healing.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and afterward the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tight, and it was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bindings, and it cannot come to the nourishment of the limb; or for multitude of dressings; or for too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and leisure; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts great nourishment, and the dressing often of water boiled, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and the torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilote, and similar things; and the you .i. make a mollifying plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the moss of vismalve, and cook it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig fats, and grind them with chaff of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes it is removed the dislocation by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with moist hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And bring about movement to the limb every hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosities are old and hardened, as well as stone, and needs be to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	A dislocation is an issue from a joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it is now necessary to bring it back without setting a splint.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance if one sets it back with pain; for this reason it is not fitting to move it at the hour that it is swollen; many times brings spame and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave him, until the abscesses of each are appeased; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as it comes in its place.  
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little bit moved from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang toward the cheek, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with the word.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by the arm's more numerous disarrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, it behooves you to reset it carefully, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to make it equal; and command the patient to soften its jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fist put it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is broken when reset, even if it is the two jawbones together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently moved; do not hesitate to reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed without softening, put above cloths moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he try to yawn, but takes light food, as long as the pains are gone, and the mandibles are numbed; and then suck what he wants lightly, and do not try to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well numbed and healed. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and customary fits come, and perhaps a bellyache, and perhaps a thick cold vomit.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these things, then know that it is a death sentence; and many times those who have it die in 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the ribs, and it is dislocated no times on the outside, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies flat on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it; and the head which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if so, and if it dislocates any time, re-set it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way is brought back the head of the shoulder, when it is displaced from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only III ways: of which one is that it is dislocated to the side of the armpit down; and the second is to the side of the breast; and by adventure dislocated to the upper part, and this happens little; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated downwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little flesh, because to these it is quickly displaced; to those who have enough flesh, it is slowly displaced, and enters slowly. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it is pushed towards the buttock, and puts difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the buttock to touch the head of the shoulder, as if they were one os; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to his hip, nor move by any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not for being brought back, when it is new, or if the child is ill.  
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so it will come back little by little.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer ointment softening and soothing, such as decoction of thyme and fennel and marshmallow in water, and administer; then lie the patient on his back, and put under the buttock a cloth of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the foot on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the hand of the sick person; and another minister holds the head of the sick person so that it does not move down; this shoulder comes back now, and if you see that you reset it according to this manner: and is that you make present the man who is greater than the patient; and be right towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the buttock of the patient, and raise the buttock upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can lift with him anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And you reset it also in another manner: and take a long stick in the earth, whose head is as the post, and neither too thick nor too thin; then put it under the patient, but that he has blankets above him, and the patient lies on the long part of the stick; then stretch his hand down on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, so do this cure: take a stick from the arm of great and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter in the middle under the shoulder, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie above the head of the stick sheet below, so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient; and extend his arm up on the long shaft of the stick, and tie the shoulder on the shaft, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one rung of a ladder of the wide, and let the hands down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in any manner that it may be, then you must put under the shoulder a sphere of wool equal, then put the emplastrum prepared of powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, upon all the shoulder and around, then restrain under the shoulder evenly, and turn the linen upon the emplastrum, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal faster; and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauteries at III points, as it is shown in the chapter on cauteries. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers on another place; and care until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient bath many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the rib is dislocated in many ways, and returns in many ways; and if it is dislocated from all sides, even before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because it is seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.  
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the way that abscesses come. Because if abscesses came to it, it would be grievous to return it; and by chance it cannot be returned completely at all, even when it is behind. It is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and death may come from it by chance.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is like this, when it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands do look according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm of the root of the palm the cut which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with both hands, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on each side, then as you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, he puts oil on any oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint forcefully, until it returns; and when it is in its place, put dry plaster on top with yolk of egg, and press it firmly, and lean the arm against the neck of the sick person, and let him for some days, then untie.  
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well aligned, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe him and rub gently, and press until it is eased; or you put on the joint a fleece of fat sheep, then leave it one day and one night, then take it off, and let him enter into the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the fleece, and then enter the bath; and thus do II times or III, until it is healed; and if you see, put on some moistened moss chaff with butter, and strain it over; and it will return to its place. 
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints. However, it must be returned to its place carefully, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not become inflamed, or that there comes a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the returning is that you put the ailing hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he looks at it straight, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it as much as it returns whole way, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; then put the patient’s back of their hand upon a table at the extension and the returning.  
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back of their hand on the table, and the healer puts their hand over the appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in its place after some days, the joint remains twisted; and does not harm the patient further than while the hand is numb, and cannot restrain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy but to constrain with cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then constrain it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the joints of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the belly; then it is the joint, and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the joint, and the bend toward the part where it is disjoined; and leave it for two days, and then put it equal that day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it from day to day, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and also do so if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and also do so when it is dislocated elsewhere. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are more than one dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the legs jump out without will, and cannot be held, and many times soften any limb, or the two thighs or the two arms or one And many times the shin moves in four parts; the one which moves at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure of this is that you return if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, where there is little profit in all; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is no cure nor healing; and also that which comes straight into the two sides, and one cannot cure it except that one properly which comes on the back, as I said; and that the patient be stretched out on his face in the same place, and have a support under him, so that he does not move; then put the splint at the head in the earth formed, and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage between the shoulders of the patient, and the other to the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers hold the bandages, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two splints; and be well fastened, the splint as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine formed, until it revives. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arm lengths long, and place it under the armpit, and have the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the board under the armpit, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and place the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see it, do it with the turning board that turns by hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you put II splints to the head of the sick man of one arm great, and towards the feet II others, and have between each splint, up and down, a palm's width of long; and have in each splint I hole, where the turnip goes, and be the splints firmly in the earth, so that they do not move; and between each II splints have I turning splint, for which the thread turns, and have in II turning II small splints of a palm's length, to turn the turnip; and then tie the thread that is among the splints to the turnip towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet to the other turnip, and each of the ministers turns its turnip all over the thread, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, place a drying plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the vertebra and the part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient of subtle treatment, until it is healed; and if any thing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have presumption: by chance it might cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and they do not come like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within it is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the diseased than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot bend his knee to fire; and it is the part which is beneath swollen with hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to fire, thus is this accident contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it comes before, thus is that he has his leg well according to accomplishment; nonetheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, thus is that he cannot expand his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you observe if the dislocation is old and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for treatment; and it does not behoove him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the 4 manners of dislocation, so hurry that you return the joint, and its length inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must appear the minister strong, and hold the leg firm with two hands, or on the linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens them with a single force over the hips; and another one holds the head of the limb; and stretch up and down all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and remain standing. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to put care into its appearance. When the dislocation is in the back, you must make the patient lie on his healthy side, then put the bandage over the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then raise the bandage upward towards the groin, and towards the thigh. Then grasp with other assistants his arms, and embrace the large lump of the diseased hip, and extend it outward in this way; now it will return to its place; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen strip above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let it be hung from the top of a staff, and let it be two arms’ length above the ground; then command the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let there be other ministers standing with the patient, who embrace firmly the hip, because the joint now returns quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, he lies down, as we have said in him who has a gilbosite, and stretches one linen on the leg of the sick person well, and on the foot also; then put two sticks, one at the head and the other at the foot, then stick one stick between the hips of the sick person within the form; and have a band of moist cloths around, that he does not bleach the sick person, then extend each minister towards him, and the one who looks at it puts each one equally in his hand the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not the case, place it on a table, namely, and press it as we have said in the booklet, and lie the patient on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put his pain on the painful side with his hands, then press with the other hand, and the end towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it does not behoove to extend the patient down, nor lift up on the ground, but rather that he should be as if his hip was dislocated outward, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table; and it will be point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest III days or IV, then untie, and put the splint upon; and if you see that they are even, strain as before, and let it stay III days; then untie, and let him walk well, until the limb is fortified. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if it does not rest at his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and retract between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests lightly at his hip; and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest at the hip, and tie them together firmly for III days or IIII, then untie it; and do not make the patient work to go, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound 
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs of it are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated; the bringing back is light, and one must gently extend it with his hands when it is just softened.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him with ministers except by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, then raise it upwards, and push the foot well up; and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place the staff firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie drapes around, so that the patient does not tremble; then hold the minister's hip, and other ministers extend the foot with their hands or at the knee, so that they tie it above the ankle; then extend each minister equally, and the staff should be well between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when we extend it; then put the fingers in equal dislocation with their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return immediately. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is pointed, put the plaster and dressings on top, and strain them firmly, and tie the leg to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for II or III days, and if the bandage softens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for IV days; and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess arises there, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the nout of the back or of the foot, then it behooves you to make the patient sit on I, that is, a table, straight, and put your foot on what separates these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is aligned, and there is nothing apart from it, then put under the sole of the foot a board at the shoulder, then strain firmly, and leave it III days, then untie it; and let it rest, as long as it is sound. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not kind and merciful and tardy, nor rash; and use at the beginning of soothing things an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb now, so that the abscess remains hot; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things a hot abscess, and cure the wound as it befits, with dry dressings; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are separated, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard yourself from entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you death according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. 
Amen	Amen 
