O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine in full, and have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is strengthened in our region and is strange throughout all, so it has perished the science and has been cut off, and there is nothing left of its forces than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the errors and the vanities, and minds are closed and science is banished.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I will revive it along with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.  
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will come along with the forms of the implements of cautery and other instruments of the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.  
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine lengthened.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with it to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the articulation of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and the separations of veins, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates says that the name alone with the name is much, but with the work little. 
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of hand.  
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things previously mentioned, should beware lest he fall into error and injure men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	As many times as I have seen, more than those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a fool cut an abscess of scrofula or goiter from a woman's neck and cut her arteries in her neck. 
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And see another case who treats a stone from a man's age, and the stone was great; 
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if he carried it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.  
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called for the treatment, and see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I well know that if one cut it he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And see another case who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant surgeon brought the fracture over the wound to the stars with a very strong ligature, and did not leave any ointment on the wound, and left him thus in the end;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded him that he should not untie it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and so the leg remained swollen, and the foot, and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and hurried to come loosen the leg; 
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I loosened it he was at peace and felt no pain.  
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all ways the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; 
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb until the limb was altogether lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wound that opens an abscess, and then inflames because of the malice of its master.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions: 
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the foolish onlookers cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the diseases treatable to good health;  
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other one of glory.  
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Gaulish says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take care of any illness, unless you are called a fool." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; 
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of the instruments, and of the handles of the cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.  
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and probing, and about blisters and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things. 
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters are ordered and the forms of the instruments.  
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; 
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.  
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it befits me to say the quality of the aid and of the discomfort of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and of harm, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret replies; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of this they spoke the most wise men, and agreed to it;  
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffice myself with few words, because I fear length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions or it has matter, except for those complexions: 
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know hot constitution by means of matter, and dry constitution by means of matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry constitution altogether matter, they said none and said that cautery there is great help;  
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the contrary: 
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery does not worth to disease that comes from heat and dryness.  
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; 
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and said he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in the bodies of men.  
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every way, let no one intercede besides he who has proved it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time; 
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the masters assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that fire cautery together is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come out further than to the member that is burnt, and does not harm any other member except for this one.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines come from one limb to another by distancing, and bring to the limb diseases of grievous healing; 
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perhaps it harms the patient.  
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things; 
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I keep you from the secret which is answered in fire, and the quality of the work, how it displaces the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; 
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive him in your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made, and how long they are held.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harms coming from it are lessened by the help of the cautery. 
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And even if the cautery is for necessary pains, outside and until they cannot endure the time that greater harm does not come to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think about it, dear child, as foolish people do;  
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because the illness that is cured by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus; 
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority. 
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is a most important thing that the patient comes at some point according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the illness and its virtue; 
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; 
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.  
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand at all for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true; 
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cautery instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance. 
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the burns of the cautery do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some men. 
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they say.  
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	But nonetheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools very quickly.  
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	as they do to fire; 
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough risk of hindrance.  
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery which we have proved useful to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two kinds made because of a sickness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and also for all maladies which come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the dose III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can endure. 
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make go back the head of the sick one.  
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands over his thighs; 
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;  
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds then scavenge the cautery which is called “olivare,” for this is its form;
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the place marked with ink, and do descending and pulling your hand peck and peck turning; 
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand slightly, and return to the place if you see the bone one small;  
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after take one peck of sail, and put in soft and moist cotton inside, and put on the place, and let him leave it for 3 days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After place on top of the leg soft in butter; 
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave on until the burning is gone;  
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treat the wound of the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healed.   
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say the ancients, that when more stays open the wound, more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason so help moves.  
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said any of these that one must leave the cautery so that part of the bone is burned, and then one should reset what is burned of the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they say the other one must the cautery so leave on, and push so hard that it lowers the bone as wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors come out moved;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound long open; 
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that one must cure and soothe.  
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I seem to him that I should leave it; 
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;  
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salved and quicker for me, and from this I operate in these matters altogether salvation. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; 
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does to him the cauterization that we have said before, and it is not effective.  
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take ward if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; 
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	therefore the cauterize those below that cautery we have said above. 
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After make cauterize on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cauterize where it is called "vessels"; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and there are them in which one puts suction cups; 
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone;  
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than the others, and I will speak of it later; 
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those where one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form; 
dou cautere dou chief	Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the patient up to the eye, and the head is purged by medicinal fluids, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of the diseases, and all this does not help; 
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore I make cautery in two manners, that is to say of hot medicine and of fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of hot medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces, as small as the head of a pin, and then make a hollow in the temple where the pain holds, in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum beneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is placed, bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours. 
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	And then unbind it and carefully remove the piece of alum, and leave the wound thus for two or three days.  
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a poultice soaked in butter on top until it heals. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After this, cure with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that it needs any other medicines burning which I have written or otherwise treated of burning medicines.  
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is made in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or it has the point of curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance. 
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it in the painful place, and hold your hand and press the fire a little bit, until the half of the thickness of the heart is burned. 
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows an abundance of blood.  
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton in the shape of wool, and place it on the spot for three days. 
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then you put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare," at all the tip, and you keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient. 
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of maladies, and it profits not, and see that the cauteries before said of the medicine and of iron do not suffice him, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery which is called «cultellare» until it be white; 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And thus rule upon the place ailing a line of half a digit of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come until the bone; 
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And guard the mandible that moves when one manipulates it, and the nerve not be irritated except only to the moving and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against flowing of blood from the artery when it shall be cut, or cutting has great fear and especially to him who does not know it, and who is not studying and experienced;  
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work be in mid way; 
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the center as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed;  
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two blades; 
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.  
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called “point”, for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or where the pain is held in both, and move away a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn; 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have X points near each ear; 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the place until it is healed.  
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torments that must be cured by cautery are few except for those that move phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; 
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make cautery on likenesses that come from dryness and nerve spam.  
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this likeness of torment that moves phlegm from the eyes and expulsions of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with III cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a point outside the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the II lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let it cauterize the place on the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery remain so long as the middle of the heart is burned. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the likeness of the cutter that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it should be that the blade is a little larger; 
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after care its place as I have said before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make IV cauteries: 
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and I remove the head, and I put it where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be cured as we have said before. 
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that modify the brain;  
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After the king has treated the head of the sick person completely, and he places on the back of the head a cataplasm of mustard as is written in the treatise of plasters; 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of the cautery:  
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if the fire if done as I have said.   
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy this way, good is; 
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it isn't, then do three cauteries of the head, descending to the neck, and have a space between each cautery one finger-width thick;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and cure it as the others, and if you see it needs to be added, and the patient is suffering, then do one cautery in the middle; 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it is necessary, II others on the II horns, and treat until it is healed. 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the chief be purified of herbs and things that we have said before; 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after having anointed the head of the sick man, then make cautery at the center of the head and on each horn, and the last one and III on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is advanced, then make IV cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after treatment until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called 'olivare' that we have said before
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not use fire cautery except the one who is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from bad medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make gargarismes for them and chewing, often changing the brain with good meats. 
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's head in the middle, and I make the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. 
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is weak and suffering, make cautery as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, make the cautery subtle according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy are the superfluities or the humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cautery of teals cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king's head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After that, make a poultice of flax well done, also as the circle, put it in the middle of the head.  
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient sit crossed, and be well held on all sides
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After present the linen, and worths moves of butter of goat ancient. 
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And the warmth to fire temperately, so that the two if one puts him may suffer.  
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After empty the circle by within remove the chief, and let it cool; 
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to patient each week once with other good government, until it be healthy.  
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see him being cauterized by making more than one burn to all of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery moistens the brain importantly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then puts above cotton moistened in butter and grease of gelling.  
de l’awe des eulz	of the opening of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the ache comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands to rear his chief, and he does cautery removed the chief, and he does II cauteries on the II temples if the descending of the awe is at the II eyes together, or in I if the descending is in I;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cut at all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and be the cautery long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, then staunch it with the power as you have.  
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to staunch it. 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and at no time is cautery or a hatchet used below the two bones behind.  
dou cors des larmes	From the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or beside the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside.  
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes. 
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize in the middle of the head, and two cauterizes on the two temples, and two cauterizes where a hatchet is used below the two bones.  
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if need be more, cauterize it carefully above the eyebrow with a small cautery. 
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit, then give the patient three crushed nuts to drink; 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	afterwards make an incision on the head, and do a cautery or middling olive-oil cautery;  
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called 'clavilis' on the two eyebrows, one slightly under the hair. 
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.  
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	of this the form is
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; 
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of your hand except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	Hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	At times it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cautery according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.  
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; 
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are equal, then put the patient in a sound place; 
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after which upon the paper of the eyes draw a figure like that of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign next to the hairs;  
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moistened cotton in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked point and point many times, so that the hairs are burned at the place. 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye. 
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, and leave it so for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment cure until it is healed.  
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after these, the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cauterizing on that same place, just as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are burned out, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the hair the eye. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cauteries of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live coal, of each one ounce, and grind together well. 
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it hot, so that it does not cool down, then spread on the form as you have made it like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the paper over the eyes. 
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the patient holds only in one eye, then one should work in that one, and if in both.  
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put under the eye cotton moistened in water of an egg; 
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the patient be in your healthy hand and put your back showing over the medicine, and press it and  squeeze all times that the patient feels a burn from the medicine, because he feels a burning as of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your right.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning will have passed, then lift the place of the eye, and look if you see the paper lifted as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision.  
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, then so much the better. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, it is again put in the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set. 
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burns are closed, then treat the place of the ointment which is called “diphanos” and others, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary, that you be careful with your work, by great care that it does not fall of the medicine into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle. 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constrictions; 
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be restored to him whose is the study of this art.  
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in a sound position. 
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And hold his head between your hands in such a way that he does not move or tilt his head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	After, put moistened cotton in the white of an egg or in juice of parsley on the eye; 
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After, heat the cautery that is such.  
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And when it is heated, put it to the head like the form of a quill feather, so that the cautery is together. 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see it, so be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, so be as a tent. 
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nonetheless, this which is shaved is worth more for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After press the fistula if it is opened, and clean out the rot, and dry it. 
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, so work it, and clean out fiercely the bowel.  
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After put upon the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the skin under the eye, that your hands do not make folly.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.  
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this is not, so begin again the cautery once more, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for three days.  
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After I put on cotton moistened in butter, and the cure of the desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass that it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicinal ointment until the bone is uncovered.  
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Listen to a fistula, and cut it open.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After put in the split a subtle camel of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and it is made to the quantity of one third of an ounce;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or camel firmly, and let the patient not move in any way that the melted lead does not run into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in vinegar or in honey; 
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the ulcer if it is in its place of fistula, and the whole by miraculous health.  
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer ointment to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of the punctures in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, there are crevices in lips called "hairs," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of those that we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply the small scalpel cautery according to this form.
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he places it carefully in those crevices until it comes to the bottom. 
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the place of carbuncle until it is healed.  
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the tongue or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and grown and is emptied and becomes a fistula; 
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit at all.  
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. 
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the bot or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes to the bottom of it, and its last place. 
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or II, after the cure of what we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy; 
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured thus, it is good;  
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this is not the case, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter. 
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and that is not effective, then put the chief of the patient in your hand; 
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after sharpen the cautery whose form will come after here in this manner that you put a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;  
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; 
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after fill the patient's mouth with saltwater, and let it stay for an hour and rinse well. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth that was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture corrupted dries.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, where there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cautery according to two ways: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.  
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization of butter is such that you take butter of calf fat, and the end in a spoonful of iron or steel; 
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; 
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moistened wool and cotton in butter cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and put on top the hot iron until the fire comes to the end of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery assembled with fire is such that you prick a piece of iron or steel, and it should be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person. 
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, because its shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools. 
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be removed that day or the next.  
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the heat of this cautery, and then raise it forcefully. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever shape you want, and according to what you are able.  
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the iron:
des scrophules	Of the scrofulous ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize the head with fire as it comes after this form, and let it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery to the other part. 
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And put the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess.  
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, put cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And put on moist cotton in butter as long as the burn is removed.  
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care the place with ointments and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors overcome on the channels of the body, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the fire cautery is done at the root of the throat, and you guard that you do not come near the throat, and burn only a little bit. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the fire cautery is done at the junction of the neck to the head of the spine, and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" as we have the form before. 
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	of the pain
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and illnesses of the chest are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever nor dryness, and is the illness ancient, if it be done. II cauteries on the  forcele in their veins; 
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and the other cautery removes the pain between II nipples; 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before. 
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, make cautery by pricking the whole cautery which is called "point" because its form is as before in the illness of the ears;  
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment of the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at III reins according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, because you make them three cuts deep.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterward, make the patient lie on his back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after lift the kernel which is inside the little one with the two fingers of your left hand; 
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, then remove the cautery which has two nerves in its place as shown here. 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the kernel until it pierces to the rib, and the figure of the cautery should come together with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this one is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of cauterization consists of six cauteries. 
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And the nerves are according to the fineness of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:  
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted on this nerve for which there are VIII cautery.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery pricked with sail; 
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After make rest the patient, and let not the limbs be moved by long time until it is well fortified.  
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upward, which rarely happens, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it is estranged from its complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and the ways of cures accustomed and he does not profit at all, therefore it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Of this then after make him three cauteries one below the shoulder blade by the quantity of an ounce, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries outside the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries be at three angles, and have such space between one another that they not be joined together when they will rot;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauteries be so well done that they will reach the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and reigning upon the stomach here, in point according to the quantity that you see of incisions; 
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point."  
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When it comes to the liver pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forcibly removed from its natural complexion by superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it at all, if it is necessary that the patient be treated upon his bed; 
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign of incisions III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, defier the hypochondria, there where the  ribs of man come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there must be space between each cautery the size of a finger. 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long along the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery; 
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only the middle of the kerf, and let the patient lie straight on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then lying down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; 
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you desire it, you may cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care that you do not burn the whole kerf, for you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to boiling, because the kerf is very subtle there, and you know how to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; 
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, he feels pain sharply.  
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this treatment fails to heal, it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his head; 
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to the sun, because of this it is shaped as follows: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the skin is burned and it reaches the white beneath, until the wound is completely closed. 
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	Afterwards, treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not proper that of this cautery use none others than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been corrupted no time. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he may boldly work, and everywhere it seems to me better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of blisters
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must do to weeping cauteries of roots of aristolochia, and in such manner:  
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristolochia long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and whether dry, and as thick and long as your fingers. 
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and soak it in oil, and press it into the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the handle and the neck, and II small cauteries a notch going down in the part that is below the beard; 
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a notch; 
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and I cautery removes the pain, and I other on the stomach, and I between II shoulders, and II as II ribs down from the cautery which is between II shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand tightly, but rather make it open as if smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they said that no old man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess. 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and jump out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.   
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are III ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which some manner is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; 
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand to all the cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; 
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is positioned in the mouse, or the cut of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After he puts the two nerves inflamed until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then removes the cautery, and thus there will be four.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cauterize all the cautery to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for edema, except for the method called “asclytes.”
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the ways that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in place of the breast; 
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cautery be close to the space of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leave the cautery open for a long time to get pus, and let not the wound of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the keyhole that we have before shows; 
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is previously put.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of yellow-white fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep with it, thus close the opening around the white, and be the cautery according to this form.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After make on II legs II cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife. 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg. 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they remain open there;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the curing of the other cures that we have said. 
de la menoison	of the hand
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues retentive and digestive that is in the stomach and in the intestine are depleted, and cannot be cured by means of cures;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four cauteries around the head subtle to all the cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauteries on the hips. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the groin, and I cautery on each flank, and II small cauteries on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you do cauteries:  
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the spine of the back, this which is all outside under the alar bone point and point in triangular shape, and one cautery under the head two. 
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face one makes the great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain open long time 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the skin, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all burning upon that skin cut; 
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let it remain as long as the cautery comes to the origin of the vein, so that the blood stops;  
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much skin, cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the cure of openings beneficial until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on  the skin, it will have more help. 
de plaie mal curee	of wound poorly cared for
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a disease that can be healed only by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula, and is filled and cast putridity and corrupted moisture, so the should prove at once a fine tent, and guard that you know at once the tent how much it has of width.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the thing entered there, and restart the cautery until that flesh and corrupted are burned, once, or twice or three times, according to the quantity of  need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And guard against damaging the nerves that are within, and the large veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, guard those parts, and make no incisions except in the fatty tissue, and think that it is not a perforation. 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After curing the area until it is healed, and if the lesions are cleansed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the lesion is completely healed.  
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not removed, know that the lesion is corrupt, and the bone at its base is corrupted. 
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the reins, and from great flatulence, and does not take any form (or doesn't come in shape), then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before. 
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will be more helpful. 
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the part outside above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic begin, and there on the right and on the left, and each cautery as long as my finger. 
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and I make the cautery outside on the back, where it is needed. 
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be made according to the form previously mentioned. 
de la marris	of the wound
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends lag behind;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain. 
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore it behooves one to make three cauteries around the head, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; 
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauteries be clavicle-like, as we have said.  
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.  
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And it is found that the place of the viscous department is viscid, so it behooves you to cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle. 
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cauteries be like those with which the stomach was cauterized.  
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, make three cauteries of large olive wood, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others. 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure until it is healed.  
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old:  
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it behooves you to purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills, or other pills that resemble good things.  
Aprés li fai cautere;	After this, make a cautery; 
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners:  
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together burning medicines, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is done in many ways, some of which are as follows: 
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the hip bone III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and large, and there be between each cautery of space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive;  
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the top of the hip bone, for which there are IV according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip. 
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make in such manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the marrow be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, then you make II cauteries where the patient says that pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle IV fingers, on the left side a little;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery curette be, and let it burn the thickness of the heart.  
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the two feet or near it, cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called “points.” 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, if you do more. 
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make cauterization with the curette or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more nuisance and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left them so that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of belly from which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the sage say in the cautery of the hip, for this is how it should be done, make a iron such as and as large as a thimble, or a little less, and either from the interspaces and either between interspaces up to the other with spacing the quantity of a knuckle;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the instruments be over to part, and let them also be like nuts, and there be the iron hand well made; 
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And be heated until it is all red and gives off heat, and then put it on the bone of the ill hip, and be turned over the sound side;  
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once the cautery is red and let it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered long time; 
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.  
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its harm, and it is seen little who uses it; 
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless these are good cauteries, which the one who can suffer it and where it is needed.  
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauteries of medicine burning is that you make the instrument in between chatterers in which descends the edge of the door, and be of iron or of a length to one side, and in the height have two, and between each the quantity of the thickness of a coin.  
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And be open downwards and upwards, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put on the bone of the hip on the patient lying on his side healthy, and after your hand very high on the bone of the hip. 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After throw between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated to the fire the spot, and let him one hour ten, and suffers the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there it finds medication also as of fire; 
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the medication is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip of soft awl, and leave thus three days, and put on butter as long as that which is black of the burn is taken away. 
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days so that it may rot; 
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the cure of dressings as long as it is healthy.  
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, then do you make an instrument that is held as according to what you have done in the hip augmentation; 
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine.  
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening that the point of a razor can enter into;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place one pot above the other well sealed, and put alkali and charcoal and sweet awl above, until there is the right amount of powders on top as you have well grasped it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let him so until it descends down its fever and excrement or as much as it can fall, then take all that  sickness and place it on hot embers and on alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then if will be much fever and is administered in the form of works of medicine and cauteries of other members. 
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does the work like fire, and if to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as turpentine and honey of cashew nuts and hot embers with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Gaius tells us about a cure of which one man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatica vein, and he spoke well, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this manner that you take the green fresh and dry litharge, and grind it very well with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it; 
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel anymore the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath until the body is a little bit aroused, and put him in his bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use cauteries of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fire of sheep, it helps a lot; 
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it must be done the cautery in this manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and wet it with old oil, and put it on the socket which is between the thumb and the foot, and the other called fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take sheep's wool, and grip it in fire until it is charcoal, and lay it on the vein, and let it for as long as it is steaming; 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat thus, and do not cease to do thus until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is ceased. 
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cauterization of sheep".  
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too much evacuation, or by similar matter spread cold, none of these appearances is worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after that the patient is emptied of fetid pills or other similar things, that one make upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "point"; 
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see it, make three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:  
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight throats when they lie down, and fear; 
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.  
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see these and you want to treat them, cauterize it with the cautery of this one according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, so cauterize around the spine with a cautery that stings two or three lines, and let the points be near each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not administer cautery in a place that is in the space of nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pains of joints are from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the people call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner: 
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the most cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you take hold upon the face of the foot, then do cauterize to the whole cautery as one claims "point."
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, with all the olive cautery. 
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand there beyond when the point of the heart is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if any pain remains in the hands, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;  
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to the shoulders or as far as the armpits, cauterize each part and give good governance to the patient and proper medicines.  
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the thigh
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in the groin and the bowels descend to the groins and it is new, then when you see to cure it, he must not urinate that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him use things that loosen his belly so that the fire descends from his belly.  
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after the fire sits on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the boils are repaired, and move them to your sides, and place an incision beneath the rupture on the bone of the finger, and every sign that seems like half a circle above the body; 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then examine the cautery of this form: 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it feels soft.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then move the boils to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward; 
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a bandage on the thighs, and another on the leg that holds his hands; 
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat it again until you come to the bone. 
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; 
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;  
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that through this the patient does not die, or other evils. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of big people also great according to their measure; 
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days' care the place of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed;  
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the care of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie for forty days on his back until the wound is well joined;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nurses be diligent for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when he wants to go to chambers. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, if it is administered a good band, and wear it for forty others days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard himself from too great repletion of drinking and eating, and from too high braiding; 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he does this teaching so is he whole healed.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of tailoring in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then to them you make the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and either burns it a third of the heart; 
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said.  
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form; 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the place of the joint and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand amidst all the cautery clavicle
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is of no avail, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called «poins», and let the cauterization be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed by the first cautery, it is well;  
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if those, commence the other cautery upon that one, because their custom is that it must be moved to the member which is near, for which it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.   
de meselerie	of mashery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are aided at times by cautery with great help, and even the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see the cautery being used, take heed if the patient is at the beginning and if she has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither sends nor remains, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the sick person, then make V cauteries on their head.  
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	And one at the crown, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; 
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and II on the II horns, and I behind on the heater. 
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I keep your hand so that the cautery comes as close as to the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape. 
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the swelling is everywhere spread;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if it manifests clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and I cautery on the top of the neck, and II cautery on the spine of the neck, and VI cauteres on the spine of the back, and I great on the crupie and I other below, and II on the II shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II on the cuts, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; 
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard the nerves that are on the last bone of the foot so that you do not burn them. 
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and the more it benefits.  
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already totally corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After care the place with flour of eggs with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When a swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb.  
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be a little bit deep in the thickness of the flesh.   
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of dressings until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And at times one makes cautery by hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus is removed the inflammation. 
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And nonetheless no one should interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable of the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of  bars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called "albaras" is severe, and the engine of medicine is of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a point thoroughly, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the blanchour is removed, and its color changes. 
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then the cure of flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and blood from alondre, of each one part; 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be well all together, and be bound with a cloth, and be aired to the place as long as it is sound. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the border of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nonetheless the wise say that one should also make cautery in the middle of the ulcer;  
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And nonetheless those do not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and more straightforward is that it be cauterized outside, with the cautery which is called 'circle', as we have said in much of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot be moved
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a malady called 'adubelati', and it lingers in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the heat; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it haste to die: 
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore cauterize it around with many small cauteries, by pricking; 
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards let it be thus.  
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of this which is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the sickness which is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot be lessened.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is called "corroding," and it is nothing else than a corruption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs like fire consumes dry vines.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can suffer cautery altogether with fire, then heat the cauteries, small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cautery of all parts as long as you eradicate all corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that all that is corrupt be removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for III days, and put on the cauterized places softened crushed with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ingrowing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after 3 days that hairs do not grow back, it is good.  
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if they do not, restart the cautery on those that remain corrupted. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this manner has sometimes been cured with sharp medicines instead of fire cautery.  
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nonetheless, the fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of sharp medicine in the section. 
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it.  
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the splints which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that by fire a sickness is born which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that hinders the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron rod as if it were a reed of lead, and it is made from good iron to the extent that it can point at every angle, and that there are subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	Afterwards, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail as long as it reaches the end of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let him leave it so for three days until it begins to fester. 
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild mallow ground with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment, hindering flesh until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and often happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them a cautery of hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this manner:  
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a piece of iron or steel, or the tip of a needle, and place it on the nail and the other things, that is to say warts. 
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the piece on so that it wraps around the whole thing, then put a drop of hot oil on it, and hold your hand well and press down with turning so that the edge of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot oil going deep to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And the patient endures a bit of the hot water sting for an hour. 
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then let him be, and it will loosen from all its roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have reached all those that are on the body, then cure the sores that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or another, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. 
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you let him tremble, and hasten his health from the cold disease. 
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, by fire, the body appears with baths, or puss-filled pustules that come from large, corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	Then it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on the head of each pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or from a long aristeologe root, or at the lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes the cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them forward, but are broken the superfluities from which they come, and are healed. 
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.  
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things.  
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous thing to prolong. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, immediately hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding be appeased under your finger, and that no drop comes out anymore. 
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put the olive cautery irons, several small and large, to fire until they are all red. 
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then grasp it, large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is visible, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the blood is restrained.  
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take hastily another from the cautery which are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped. 
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood runs from the artery, it cannot be well stopped even when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: 
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on top which have the power to stop blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it be bound and held firmly.  
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring it to rest by tightening with straps or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not profit him, not at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have not yet used any present medicine, then he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is secured over the wound and over the vein. 
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently until the blood is congealed and thickened and secured. 
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cautery and medicine.   
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the care of stones.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness where it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have set this chapter of them up to the foot, and in this chapter I will go by the same way for those who are found more easily those who desire it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin these things, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. 
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.  
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	There come those who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily due to the ignorance they find in their disease, and the greatness of their wickedness. 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one should have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And among these there are some who give you their meaning, and say:  
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed"; 
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is deceitful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not open yourself fully but wisely to those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have trust and profit from.  
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use divination and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be converted.  
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear friends, our Lords give you good understanding and straightness, and if you will desire to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter by chapters, according to what it is before, the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find them more easily those which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this sickness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the head of the child.  
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death. 
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work of these treatments.  
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water and it grew each day until he could not bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and believed so much the moisture that he was dead, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone. 
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and this work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you make in the middle a wide split.  
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture flows.   
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the form of the spatula.  
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the corners of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it doesn't return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you make in the middle three splits according to this manner. 
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After strain the fissures of cloths and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave so until the fifth day; 
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then unbind it, and treat the wound with coverings and ointments, and leave the main dressing to be strained, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess, and its assembly of liquid; 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for never once is it in front;
aucune fois derrier;	never once behind;
aucune fois en destre;	never once on the right; 
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never once on the left.  
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore, cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of liquid, and make it according to what you have power to do.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard that you do not cut the artery;  
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and vein blood flowing, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease which is called «catarrh» in the eyes or in the chest, and the illness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help at all, then the last cure is cauterization with this one which covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see it necessary to cut them, that the patient makes his head go back;  
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretch the patient's neck to the whole cloth;   
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein beats, and its location on one and the other is after the ears, and so are put back;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the locations with a pencil, then cut both of them with a sharp spatula from the side, until the tail vein comes to the bone, and this is through the width of the head.  
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as I do across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood leaps out from above continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear at the touch, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark with a pencil and make until the bone;   
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And as for the blood to be let out, it is six inches, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery. 
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:  
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone without suppuration, then cover the wound with a poultice so that no abscess comes, then restrain the wound and bind it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.  
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migraine old comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moistors of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him, if we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient lays back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little deeper than in some men who are too cold; 
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is deeper, then strain the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly.  
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the form: 
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it on top with pincers, and well depart from the webs that are under each part; 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is subtle, turn it with the point of the uncine, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all of itself at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And treat with blood of the VI c, up to III; 
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in II lengths of a strong double thread of silk so that corruption does not come before the healing of the wound, and blood flow occurs.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut the superfluity which is between the II liens in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, so do cauterize with the cuticular cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulders are cut; 
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the best work if the patient doesn't have a fever and is of hot constitution. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery helps to finish the moisture:  
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for that reason it is of more great help against moistures. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put a tight bandage over it well made;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are untied, so be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with bandages until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if you lack the artery cord as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover with cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and the strain to your hand that the blood be stained. 
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you lack those presently, then put upon the place your finger until the blood be coagulated, and raise the place of cold water as long as the blood ceases, and be strained as it is proper; 
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is quicker and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cuts be well thickened to keep longer their heat. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments is too hard, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And must have between the two knives one finger of thick spacing, and then when you have singed the two places, and you put the red hot iron upon it as long as it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be spaced apart between the two shoulders because it is not entirely welded by this cautery at all. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:  
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the side of the head above, and no cure from medicine helps, and you see the face of the patient being rolled up, and feels or forehead walking as if from tremors; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and where they are wet and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are inflamed, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this cure.  
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contused cure," and that you do in reverse to the patient who has this illness.  The hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; 
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the incisions be also as II should all remove the forehead in swallowing down until the eyebrow, and the others II as II ribs above the papers, and you guard the incision of the arteries that are as II ribs above the papers; 
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of III should across the joined; 
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe the blood, then put the spatula sharp from II parts of which is the shape: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision that is over the temple until the second incision; 
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape all the marrow that is between the two incisions to all the tissue that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put in the first incision the instrument which is called “cultellaire”, and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the rib edge towards the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head toward the eyes as long as the incision is continuous to where it opens to the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure to the other end. 
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract the blood evenly, and express its quantity for the taken blood.  
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and honey, and guard that an abscess does not come there.  
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the ligature, and then administer a strong potion of boiled water, then the cure of oil of basil with rose oil, and other cures that one uses for wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	Of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When to any vein comes acute catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes dimmed and small, and weakening the sight, and the whites burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs fall out, and where it pierces causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes.  
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, you know from these accidents that these materials and this cautery come only from many veins, and the cured wound that is there, such is this one.  
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to retract his forehead, then make a wide cut between the eyebrows, and another one at the width of I eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And beginning from the split of the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; 
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the eating. 
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then carefully between the two lips of the split put old cotton, and bandages of linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep yourself from a hot abscess; 
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, it is proper that you rub the bone until skin begins to grow, then treat it with drying things that cause skin to grow back.  
En teil maniere:	In such manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice. 
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer it on these wounds to prevent the flesh from rotting. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into ears is one of four things:  
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beast, or piece of stone or similar thing like iron; 
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or seeds such as peas, beans, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or flowing things like water and honey and similar things. 
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or another thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make them sneeze with a condiment, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and is the ear upwards. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Much of the time comes force by this cure;  
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come force, then he administer extraction as pinches subtle, from which is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps force with the pinches, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not those, then administer extraction to the  bone subtle of small fold; 
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not jump by those, then make a caine of iron and put the head of the caine or hole in the ear strongly, and stop those who are around the caine with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the caine;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment must be strong because many times it comes as we have said.  
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come strong in this manner, then take glue of that which takes the birds, and put it into some instrument which is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; 
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and treat strongly.  
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she does not follow all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear in such a way that an abscess boils there, and spasms; 
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of opening it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening at the root of the ear in the fat where they depend; 
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And let the opening be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the stone, then break it according to your strength, and suck it diligently with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And care for it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot issue, then administer a spatula thin according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is wet due to moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it. 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water therefore that falls into the ear, it is appropriate for the patient to use a first external dressing, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it has leaped forth by means of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If this is not the case, then take many grains according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and cauterize them a little with fire; 
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put them in the patient's ear where it is perforated, and let it come out on its side, and fire another grain on top of the grain which is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to do this with grains upon grains until the water comes out entirely, and thus it will all come out entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see, then take some reed and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end in fire until the reed burns down to a point;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do again another part of other joints until the water is all out, as we have said in the stone.  
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division. 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large-bodied and one can feel it, then administer extraction of pincers.  
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the treatment is not helpful, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: 
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there appear no worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the instrument of which this is the form: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed gently throughout the chain. 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.  
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then stop plugging the chain with cotton as I said in the stone; 
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; 
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see;  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of silver or of arain [perhaps 'iron'] three parts under the small hole, and above over to distill; 
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press within the distillation the instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; 
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then throw in your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the channel, and the channel be in the ear; 
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil be distilled or the end of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and he feels it within the patient, and let the distillations I a little be heated by fire then one puts them in the ear. 
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.  
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without a hole in their ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men because of a wound or  flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes come from within the ear, if one cannot see it. 
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes one can see the hole clearly,
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Those that come from within and cannot be seen, are of great healing in more situations, and for this reason you should put the ear of the patient to the sun. 
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the hair growing back, if the work has all this spatula of this form: 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be both sharp and deep in front and behind, so that it does not cut the ear;  
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the hair growth is from flesh or cartilage of the ear, if then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh be all removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ulceration is in the ear, take a fine light razor and warm it a little at the fire, then put it in the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the hair growth where the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not strike the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment.  
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for no day until the wound be healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder upon pounded vitriol;  
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you draw out the tent and move another moist tent in cerote which should be made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are or treatments of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the sheet of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This athlet that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, then it is necessary that you extend them with forceps and pincers, and the cope of a spatula from its roots.  
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on their place powdered vitriol. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without it decorticate, then cauterize with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision should move. 
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots.   
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return at all. 
de la gresle	of the groin
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem brittle in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "Hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper above and below;  
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such: 
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take heed if the hail moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Do then the wide, then the eschar of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cut it. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover it without feeling a little the paper, so it does not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed. 
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointment restores it soon and prevents flesh.  
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the stone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and hold the stone with pliers, and press it from both sides. 
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it does not matter.  
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the stone is cut, leave the eye of salt water, and cure the place of those who cause flesh until the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is generated in the tissues of the paper above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and it hurts their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears rush into their eyes; 
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie on their faces down, and sleep on it, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the excoriation between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your healthy; 
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then takes the linen sheet, and prepares a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains each side, then puts it on him;  
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and presses with his two hands from one side and another, so that the sides are assembled within the circle; 
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then makes in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit of wide size, and not be more than the wound one makes on the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin in part as far as you come to the sides; 
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in more places comes the opening from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.  
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract then with a whole piece of cloth between your two hands at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left as long as it is spread; 
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and guard that you do not add to the split, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not blind it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so carefully widen the split slightly until it opens.  
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten drapes in hot and cold water, and put it on its place, and restrain with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if to such men who grind grain and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which is lodged.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the place hot, so its cure with plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs are attached to the eyes other than natural ones and are enflamed, they harm the eyes and bring about various illnesses such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids and clouding, as much as it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes; 
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and its treatment follows FOUR ways: 
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cauterization with fire together, or by sharp medicine according to that which is before or the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by forceps, according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.  
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, it is good; 
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put a needle through all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and be it next to the edge of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull the thread upwards all over the paper, and turn it back to the razor; 
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, all over the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull the thread out, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then place on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it needs, one cuts a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make on all the spatula above the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the large tear until small.  
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the two corners of the heart, and then scrape it completely.  
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle with all the finest wool thread, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the hairs on the two eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you see to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if this is not, if you have no care for it, then leave the suture and the hairs until three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then cure the wound without suture with drying and constricting things, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way 
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and that you mark the paper with a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at III ounces wide according to the form which is here.  
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover what goes over the small forces equally according to the form which is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle which has thread, and put it into the middle of the figure; 
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put the other thread near the larger tear, and the second thread near the smaller one, and assemble between your two threads evenly. 
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have marked it, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed;  
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointment. 
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If it is necessary that you use those things that we have said about incision;  
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the stitching in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of bites is according to this form:  
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And it is that you would convert the paper and the send inside according to those that I have said, and then make II bites by art, and II subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; 
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut as II heads from II parts where you hold the threads;  
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then assemble one and the other subtly above those that rise from the paper of the eye, and restrain the II bites from the II parts forming;  
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And let it so for some days, and the skin which is restrained will die and shrink and pull, as long as it dries by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he delays, if he strikes with force, then treat him until he is healed; 
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is healed, and if the paper has been lifted, and they can no longer prick the hairs; 
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide. 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The works are such that you prick a fine needle, and it puts in the silk thread soft and fine; 
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the shoulders and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; 
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the chase the other silk thread finely, and knot the ends of the thread;  
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head on your palm; 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and be in the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair joined, and make it pierce into the paper gently until you draw it above the natural hair; 
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more. 
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out of all the chase onto the paper with the natural hair.  
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you shall thrust the chase downward to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out through the opening above and you see it by the sight of your eye. 
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you shall draw the chase and the thread, and close your eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows above it.  
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural chevelure, and either raise it with that or leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness which is called "aleocrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways. 
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.  
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by suddenness of wound, or incision or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of treating it is that you cut that suture and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and tie it until it is healed. 
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	Because if you do those things, the illness returns worse than the first; 
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening things, such as fennel; 
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of water or aloe and flaxseed cooked, and melted dragon oil in any oil, and wrap a tent, and treat it with those.  
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not weld itself according to the form that it was before; 
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these works that we have said are nothing but treatments for this illness so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.  
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation is truly called “axacrati,” and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of the work in this is that you prick a needle, so that it has a double thread, and you put it into the flesh, and let it pass from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes out at both shoulders of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then lift the flesh above the entire needle, and cut it with the spatula wide.  
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is right, it is good; 
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If it is not so, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make II slits where it costs inside the paper.  
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the heads of the II slits be at the II angles of the incision that you have cut, and make them so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "I greiche";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its costs is pulled down, from those which follow the paper, then adjust the II parts severed, and stitch them with a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the malady comes from a split or a suture or a cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat slit under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above; 
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; 
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form;  
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many positions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	of the swelling of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture happens to men's hands in such a manner that the skin above is joined with the white of the eye, and cannot move or make its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the skin, and lift it upwards; 
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And the extent of the pincers, until you cut what is stuck to the spatula, subtle, which is not too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula too blunt nor pierce the eye; 
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision, which you skin that assembly, lightly so that the paper returns according to its natural form; 
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And is healed all that assembly, and do no times in the eye salt water, and the lift of sweet water, and of collar; 
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened in abundance of an egg; 
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day use of the collar and things soaked as long as it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to II manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and resembling the hard syfac, and another which is not at all nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one cauterizes it pinches, so cannot one;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both of them begin toward the great tear, and cross little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand then he opens his eyes; 
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lifts the paper with your hand, then where the angle has pinches of little wrinkles, and it is above. 
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put in its hair of horse or cow hide, or ox, and the strong thread; 
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and put it into the angle, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with thread and it is above, and scrape along all the hair the side of the angle which follows the small wrinkle and the silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear throughout the spatula subtle and with small forces, and leave the natural char tear so that by incision does not come the body of tears accustomed. 
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes the fingernail comes to the nailbed alone, as we have said. 
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scraping has all the spatula shaped from this is the form:  
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And keep that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the nail be not pierced; 
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision put in the eye a bit of silk ground, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day. 
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure of those that it behoves as long as it is healed.  
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle, and the nailbeds cannot enter, many times is cured this appearance of a nail of medicines.  
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form. 
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And move the hinge upward subtly, and if you see that it decreases not and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye colocynth made of litargire and the red colocynth and seal, and plug the eye until the other day. 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no other thing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then treat it with milk and first cure the boil as well as possible until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh near the eye is harmed by the moisture, then suspend it with the bandage and cut off a part and not half completely, that no tear liquid may come.  
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the car which is born on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men are born at times red and cover the white part and hold onto the eyelids, and turn to the outside, and appear like a rose of a balustrade.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then open their eyes, and with all that flesh with bandages suitable to them, and sustain it with force. 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the end, and take care that you do not wound the eye in the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces by which one removes the bone, as the form after this chapter demonstrates. 
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil of silphium ground or distill red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the oil a cloth soaked with beaten egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess. 
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if it remains nothing, and the wound still burns, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess. 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until the flesh is joined in the oil by this manner. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless, it is necessary that you follow the treatment of each weak oil according to natural means.  
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the way accident, in work of iron; 
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.  
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Those veins are red that are covered above the eye, and they take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary first that you look at the eye, to see where it is, and if there is nothing else but the pain.  
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore do it in this manner: 
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to put his head on your chest, then suspend those veins along the entire spine according to your wisdom, and let the  veins be thin, doubled according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two bones be joined by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then one should tie those veins tightly and carefully wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see the removal of those veins outside the eye; 
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And guard that you do not blind the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins.  
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, if distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the seed.  
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you do not have power to gather all of it in this hour, then make a poultice on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and are assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; 
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mire so named "arissati" fistula: 
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a thing in it which you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.  
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the tools of what here are the forms. 
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called "rough chief," and it is made of fire iron to the head front, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form: 
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; 
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place with medicinal excretives.  
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the flesh is soldered, and there is no birth of cartilage, and the body of the bow is soldered, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew itself and is not at all an abscess, and a bad accident does not come to it, know that it is healed; 
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this does not work, if there is no other means than to bring the fistula to the opening of the wound according to this form:  
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the wood according to this form, and let the head of iron be at III angles, and the staff be thinned to the top as you see here:  
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye slightly, then turn the entire wood until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his wound;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens in its places, then let the matter go into the wound;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	It is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open throughout and all, and they do not come to distort to the nose, nor lessen, then it befits you to bind the patient. 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then the clean, then put suction cups or a vessel without injuring to suck, then put over the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and plasters it with bandages and cloths; 
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in IV, and then put one over the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; 
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then restrain from above with a hard bandage-like thing, and recommence the suction cups to suck without injuring; 
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the leeches and let the eye be restrained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then it is necessary that you restrain it much; 
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligament after the day and night, and if you see the eye repair, it is good;  
se ce non;	If not; 
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then begin again the plaster and bandages and the ligament and leeches until it is healed.  
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the dislocation of a web
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When rupture comes in the membrane of the eye, then open it, and come forth papers like as the grain of resin, and is expectable to see. 
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle in the root of the lower part until the upper one, then thrust another needle where it has the double thread from the inner part.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and let it be examined, and leave the first needle according to the disposition 
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut its length with the double thread and tie one part of the skin around it, and bind it well, then remove the needle and put on the other eye half in a fold of egg. 
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread falls with the skin, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and at any time the wound is restrained by skin on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eyelids, and enter them immediately. 
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.  
de la bowe de l’oil	of the ball of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bow which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water.  
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it as much as you see the bow come up to your eyes; 
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then so it is fixed, and do not let it descend and be dislodged the light, and the patient sees things as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you do sit the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make on the cornea a hole through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as much as the bow allows.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is out, distill in the hot water mixed with honey, or water or fennel boiled and honey, then be cured of another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have taken the appearances of waters in their division, and those that are necessary for inspection;   
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	so in work according to health.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye and hold it very tight; 
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if their eyes are left, or on your right hand if their eyes are right; 
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if their eye is left, the instrument that is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if their eye is right; 
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that whiteness of the eye to the part of the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument which is called «almagda» virtuously, and restrain your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the channel almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the nipple to the end of the blackness; 
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and that is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument up to where the water is, then squeeze it below one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water now descends, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest the little bit, and if the water comes back up the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is set in and it does not come up, then withdraw almagda lightly by turning your hand here and there;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in place a point of seed silk, and leave of those the eye inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by means of a poultice or soaked cloth with rose oil and yolk of egg, and bind with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top a certain crushed thing with an abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit", of this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep into it, but make its location subtle, then put almond as we have said. 
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work equip the patient with the bed next, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place. 
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then the one who is tied up in that same dark house, and he proves his sight, and I make him see some things, and then I put the bandage back on until the seventh day. 
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bandage them because the water rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess comes, that you unbandage the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this who soothes the abscess; 
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is appeased, then unbandage the eye and put on his face the orilliet to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house.  
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he comes out of the house a little at a time, and converts himself into his ways;   
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciples should interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda by perceiving [something], to which water is added, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; 
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it's a new thing.  
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see it; 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are of a certain kind properly:  
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these same subtlety, and the last one in three angled sharpness.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh around the joint
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No times are born or made chariots adjusted diversely, for which there are some that seem scorpions with many feet;  
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are any of such where it has a chariot incrusted of dusky color, and if to the chariot under of good color.   
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that one therefore of these chariots which is under-colored, and not incrusted, it is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;   
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	And works his nostrils, and casts the tool to those cars, and the hairs out.  
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then hold what you can sustain on the subtle sharp spatula of one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.  
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be held, then open it with all the subtle light instruments so that nothing remains. 
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without a swelling or abscess,  you saw, so as is convenient;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the hairs are removed, then cast upon it either oil or wine.   
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the skin works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; 
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut: 
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	therefore it is necessary that you put in it the thread of linen a bit thick, and be soaked with warm hands, and have between each one a space of 1/2 inch or less. 
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's shoulder with the thread in his nape to his power, and pull in gently until it comes through the nap into the mouth; 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times children do this at school, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it.  
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head coming from the nap in one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth in the other hand, and feel one after the other with care of those who are or thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as much as you know that the new ones have corrupted that flesh, then treat the child, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back to the wound as before.  
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh. 
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on the wound a cake of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them. 
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, to which one distills oils and medicines onto the wound:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a basin, and conduct it so.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see it, so make a closed cage, and let the instruments be full to purge the head. 
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And have your hand on the head to hold it when you heat the oil or any liquid.   
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh around the joint
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease called "tellus" is born in the head of the newborn, and it grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is a terrible thing to look at.  
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and remove all of its bone, then put on top of it the cautery or burning medicine. 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay in cutting it until it is large, then beware that it is hard, of poor color, and of poor sensation.   
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts it at any time, there comes great harm to the patient. 
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is of soft touch, not of a dark color, and you see that one can completely cut it open, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the place with dry and astringent things.  
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, because in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to look if the wound is fresh in all its blood; 
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two lips with a suture, and treat it until it is healed. 
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and powdered incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhering plaster, and let it stay until it falls by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.  
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of stitching is that you assemble the opening: 
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;  
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some men, there are hard abscesses within the lips, like poppy seeds, some smaller and some larger;  
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split them on each side, and take with forceps and cut it in each part;  
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply to the place after the incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stopped. 
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it thus, and treat the place with dry things until it is healed.  
de la char des gencives	of the gum
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times on the gums there appears flesh joined, which the ancients call "albulus"; 
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so it behooves you to support it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and leave the wound open to bleed.  
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the place powdered vitriol or other astringent and drying powders; 
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. 
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after cauterization;  
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the root of teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth are foul-smelling. 
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	So it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and hold his teeth or those scabs appearing until nothing remains there. 
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus do of the blackness and of the greenness, and of the yellowness and of the other spots, as long as they are seen. 
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one removes those that are in the first place, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not those, then it begins again the second day and the third, until you have pulled out all.  
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that the teeth need diverse forms of instruments to be pulled out, according to what the work shows, because those razors with which one pulls out outer teeth have other forms than those with which one pulls out inner teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others be with you prepared. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take out as much pus as you can, because one must not do otherwise. 
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very high substance up to the point that we have no excuse to erase.  
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to take milk, it is necessary for you to be certain about the tooth aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times despite the pain the patient, and thinks that it is a tooth saint, and makes pus drain from the good tooth; 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and nonetheless does not depart at all the pain because of this, as long as the bad is remaining, because we have it already seen to do this to their healthy ones;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the tooth wanting to be removed, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides; with a strong spatula to ward the gums from all parts
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your two hands or forceps subtly at first peck and peck, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps.  
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's shoulder be in your holy space between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and put it gently inside each side, and move it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are. 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you tightly hold it with tongs, that it does not break while being held.  
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary very skillfully to work around the gum to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And thus be well warned that you do not break it, and leave a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And guard that you do not act as the ignorant masters do, who by their haste and boldness break the chariot sometimes and bring nothing of what we have recounted. 
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring sometimes by the opening of those great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or for the chariot they break, as we have often seen. 
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash its place with wine or oil and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding comes, which often happens, apply to the place vitriol ground up. 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if those do not help, cauterize it.   
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, to which we put teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, that they do not double when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let the members be thick so they do not bend when working, and let them be of good iron, well made, and toothed to hold tight.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary that you put on top a moistened cotton in butter for a day or two, until the wound is healed, then put in pliers called "algefri," so that the shoulder seems like a bird's beak. 
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and be made inside as well as a file and this is the form:  
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say a spatula, because this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be thick and big so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, it is good. 
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if this one, then help yourself with all your instruments, of which the forms come after this:  
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II reins, of this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are in front in the order of the teeth, and this instrument that seems like great pliers, whose form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted. 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the most skillful surgeons find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks a bone or other bones, or it can be broken, then he seeks the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from this is the form: 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then return to their place with medicines suitable to those, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, so the key has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or trim it: 
adonques lou raie;	therefore the furrow; 
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is armed with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, and it resembles a small beak, and be of sharp iron on top;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copy prick and prick in hand days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then file with a such as this is form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and also like the file with which one makes needles; 
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in filing the tooth back and forth in your hands lightly, so that it does not move until it comes to a point; 
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then make it plain at the end with no scraping, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.  
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth before loosens, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he moves it without pain, and you have treated them with restraining medications, and they are useless;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If it is necessary to restrain with a gold thread, for the silver threads become green and corrode, but gold never changes.  
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth. 
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth being close together, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the chies between the remaining teeth, if there are one or more, until you come sagely to the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then begin the covering again until the part where you began, and pull your hand subtly and sagely, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the chies of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue. 
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then let it remain thus tight as long as it can, and if it loosens, or the threads slip, restrain it with another thread.  
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains and serves thus its entire term, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two diseased ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls, it is put back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.  
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And let no one interfere who is not knowledgeable and skilled, and sometimes the form of a tooth made from the bone of a cow's hoof is made, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue or naturally, that is born thus; 
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accident of a joined wound;  
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; 
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the  nerve of the tongue as long as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is from a wound, then put the probe in and cut the nerve on that side; 
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and keep that the cut be not too deep for the artery which is below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, then lift the level of  water and rinse, or with cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and every night apply a salve to the patient, so that they may not harden. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, put crushed vitriol on the spot. 
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if the blood does not stop, cauterize it with the lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with other remedies until it is healed 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see it of fiery color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, because it is a chancre. 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is declining towards whiteness and there is moisture, place the ointment and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if the blood does not stop in your work, put crushed vitriol on it until it is cleansed, then return to your work as long as you extract all pus. 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift its place from above and below, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes comes from within the throat boils that are called “godath,” and one calls them properly the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: 
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If they are hard abscesses of small size and dusky colored, do not touch them with iron at all.  
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, nor for the drawing of blood; 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it is dead, and then you will divide it where it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white color round, and the root is subtle, then have an instrument prepared to cut, but first look whether the abscess chills rests and is appeased. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his shoulders be on your healthy one, and he opens the mouth and the surgeon places the instruments between his hands, and presses the tongue down to all the instrument, from which this is the form;  
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it be of silver or fine steel as well as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if then take the probe and put it into the center, and thrust it upwards as much as you can;  
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and thrust no thing from the fabrics with it, then cover the instrument, from which this is the form, that seems like forces; 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and nevertheless the head are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel: 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharpened on one side, and on the other side not;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cauterized one of the almonds, cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and with hot and sweet water, and if there is a flowing of blood, gargle the patient with hot water, or apple peels cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped; 
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it until it is sound; 
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And at no time do other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cauterize them thus like the two almonds; 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was in her throat, namely the small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and I had closed the entire throat well, so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained so for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high raised that it had been driven into two furrows by its two openings.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore took so much, and placed it in one of the incisions, then the thread was pulled out, and a great portion of the gut was drawn.  
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I made another piece in the other opening of the two, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue. 
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I placed the incision in these abscesses, and packed a portion, and only a little blood came out. 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat was cleansed and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time. 
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess grew back, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large. 
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I engaged it and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	So it remains without growing; 
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I depart from these parts, and may God do what He will after me.  
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the skin is brought together around the grape, and it is plump and long, then it is called "perpendicular"; 
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is somewhat large and round, then it is called "grape".  
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is thin, then it behooves you to cut it; 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one which is round and gathered together, and is not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it is bloody or of a rusty color or black, then it behooves you to close the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention before;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then put the awl in the eye, and work it out, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you should not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit. 
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut more, it grieves the voice and speech.  
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, you should use an instrument to cauterize the senses that cause fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head on your thigh, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in this chapter of cautery, and applies with very hot water so that it is not too thick nor too light.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And use the tip of this instrument, for that is the form:  
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have one hair or place the medicine, like the head of a spoon, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the wound;  
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient be lying on his side so that the saliva and muscle tissue from his mouth flows away from the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the neck;  
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over all the medicine and press onto the wound, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it reddened and the irritations of the medicine be appeased;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the channel above, as long as the cotton adheres to the wound; 
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait after IV or V days; 
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine. 
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.  
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision; 
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated with fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and let it boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well covered with strong earth, and inside the pot have a breathing instrument according to this manner. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or iron, and one of the ends should be put in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye by the nose, as long as the eye is numbed. 
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the wound heals often, as long as the skin is dry, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen. 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not do this before except at the decline of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and put inside its head a wick of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the wool does not let the steam heavily bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times there are lodged in the throat bones or spines of fish, or any thing
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So therefore it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And that which does not open for you and is placed in the throat, it behoves you to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach. 
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	But by chance if it gets stuck there through vomiting.  
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cloth, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread. 
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and to the sponge the thread, and then he swallows it.  
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when she comes to her place, if she dries up, then you will pull forward. 
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if she does not come forward from those that we have said, then take the instrument of bronze according to this form. 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head raised up.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to life, nor thrust the bone inside. 
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and move so that the patient puts the instrument in, for this reason that he may be moved or the thing is worse.  
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If she pushes down, or he pulls it forward evenly all of the instrument, as long as she is forward. 
de la sansue de la gorge	of the cutting of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	At no time is medicine given to the wound, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.  
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, treat it with all little forceps, or subtle pincers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put fire at the end of the dog's hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient stands of water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it enter without swallowing, and move it with your hand often. 
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the patient feels the water, he will fall.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, to the instrument that I said in the smoking of the grape.  
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without struggling. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the smoking is that you ignite the pot in which there are burning coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that one insert the head of the instrument.  
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you place your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes until the throat 
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the throat will now open, and if it does not open, start the fumigation again many times; 
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient suffer thirst, and chew salty things and others, and do not drink water;  
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be necessary that it is healed by this treatment. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it has a resemblance to the beak of an eagle, and it has sharpness from lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; 
et vez ci la forme:	and see here the form: 
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many resemblances of an abscess are, according to those who remember after here in this book, and differ in perforation and size; 
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways one of which is in its resemblance itself, and because of what it holds moisture.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the limbs where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if on abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the boil is ripe according to its fulfillment; 
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are rotten, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses which are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it be as long as it is rotten, by chance the ligaments and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; 
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then as long as it is ripe; 
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion, except that one which is below the base, so that it may not break further, and be lengthened inwards, and a fistula comes.  
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and not be able to heal in a great period. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is fitting that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is death according to its completion, and this is when the pain has been appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and of the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is fitting that you make the perforation where more dependent the part of the abscess, and where it appears pus. 
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and be the perforation long of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equals where it has no foldings.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that are dislocated, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the puncture open as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce him before these parts, then it will lengthen the body of the venom from him, and it is full of much filth.  
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden the lips and deepen them from him. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess which are perceived according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings;  
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; 
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to burn the core, and cover. 
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become as a shroud, and is dying, then one should do as with boils:  
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split in three angles, and if there are such which one covers as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits; 
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.  
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them fully; 
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; 
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop up the abscess until the other day, then do not pull anything away from it. 
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times in a row, as much as the bowel is whole.  
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	samely if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man who is decrepit.  
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes bursts forth with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not worried about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; 
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a flat cut, then administer bandages of linen or old cotton.  
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that they come against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut into an abscess a part of the skin and have covered it back over, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day. 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound, and its care with ointment as long as it is healing.  
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the flow of blood happens in your work, so administer cold water and ease it, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the flow of blood persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is during wintertime, and the place where the abscess or boil is is very sensitive, then it is necessary to put on tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil. 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in summertime, and the place where the abscess or boil is is fleshy, then it is necessary to put on cloths moistened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.  
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then unbind the abscess and wipe it and treat it as needed until it is healed.  
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this it behooves to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: 
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have said how one must proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here see the chapter.  
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where boils on the head come small abscesses, and they are manners of ours that are in cloths, as the joiner of a hinge, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such ones which have moisture like poultices; 
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are those that are hard and stony in shape, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the hip are such that you should consider all instruments which are called "entromissoire," because their form comes here afterwards, what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so lift it from above with a long stick.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture has been evacuated, then it is necessary to scrape off without leaving the hair which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves it. 
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if this one not, in water and in salt, and then apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these correct those that remain of the night.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night. 
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it is healed.  
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds in the fat, so cut according to this form, of the long. 
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And it throws its dressings, and the skin off from all sides, and puts all its care to drain under the coat where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery does you the opposite, so do those that I told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is purulent, and with cutting and caring as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting above the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if to any of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these were the abscesses that I cut or chiefs of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess also like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken.  
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had made no incision, it would have been as well done as with a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or at the head, those which come at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, let the opening be always at the lowest point, so that pus flows out easily.
et les cure si com il covient.	and the cure as it is necessary. 
des scrophules	Of the scrofulous ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come in other parts or of the body, and are bad, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, like the boil and the abscess of the head, as we have said. 
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many.  
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In that one therefore which you see of good disposition to the touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves from every side and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the vessel, and is not deep. 
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	If it is necessary that you cut it from above, and the peel of each part, and make the two lips of the heart like incisions, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head; 
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and the train poke and poke, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and be neither the spatula thick nor trenchant, that the hand does not escape, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and extract the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal.  
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, as long as you complete it. 
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then if there remain any small pustules at the tip of your finger, cut them and remove them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not advisable that you cut the pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it hang down without annoyance.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply to the wound old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the dressing. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then that there is no longer any superfluity for the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more; 
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it thus as the one before said, depending [it], then administer compresses with ointment and similar things, so that it rots what remains of the corruption; 
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, then the dressing of ointment preventing flesh, until it is healed.  
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; 
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and it is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	To those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be opened;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And one does not make help by those, for those that all the veins and the pores of the patient are at those who have abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore it is fitting, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small opening through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the opening of the syfac, not in the cartilage. 
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And this is suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough from it. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he extend the skin of the throat to all the way, then cut open the kernel as far as it comes to the channel.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel which jumps out of its place which is broken, and by the lack of voice. 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open a piece.  
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour is passed of which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all alone without the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is sound.  
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore cut on the epiglottis for those that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death. 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this commanded the ancients to let the wound open until the malice of the illness is passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I see. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see that a young lady took the knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; 
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by her healer, and found her as dead.  
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and knew well that it had not been cut vein nor led forward except to the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healed; 
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the young lady that she returned to her voice, and returned to her condition afterwards;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for because of this I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear.  
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like a boil, and it is much in women; 
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to II manners:  
naturez, et accidens;	Nature itself, and accidents; 
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or Nature has no engine.   
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to II manners, one of which is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. 
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it is not proper to work fiercely except in that which is small, and the proof and search into all the intruder: 
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like our fat, and cannot into any vein, if you cut it, as we cut the fat, and treat all its head, if there is any.  
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And enclose well soon, and treat it as it is proper, until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many manners of us are there, of which I will say all the resemblances;  
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it is necessary for me to say all the difference which is between our and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that an issue is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling (of pus) has passed, and is complete with rot; 
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then rest the fever and heat.  
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the our (our) there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the pus, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large; 
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to II appearances, or gray, or moist, and many of colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of this type of ailment, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to its shape and chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of incising (of) the abscesses of our is that you prick or more moist their place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then it shall be according to the greatness of the abscess; 
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the instrument, and take care of those that may jump. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs forth short, what color it has, treat it as I said with other abscesses; 
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument no moisture comes forth, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each side and guard the coat where it lies so that you may draw it out healthy with the nut; 
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.  
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it returns to us many times; 
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains and the wound grieves you, use some sharp corrosive powders on the wound, and strain the wound, and place soothing things on top of the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; 
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large to us, then we sew the two lips of the wound, and care for that which generates flesh 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the bleeding vein is contrary or other, then hurry and apply the place of powdered vitriol, and leave it for two or three days, as long as the wound suppurates, and rest the boiling of blood; 
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cover that which remains of the new.  
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the intromitting instruments, and they are in three ways. 
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small.  
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares that are called 'albaret,' and one which is called 'breb,' and there are of three ways.  
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; 
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles that one sews with for sorcerers, and are of citrine gold, or iron, or silver, and most valuable are those which are yellow, and are more experienced to be used against black pimples in order to enclose the borders of a fistula; 
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three ways:  
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the needles are of many resemblances, as you see here:  
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if needles which have two curvatures of three ways also; 
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if needles which have three curvatures, and are also of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if needles which have two curvatures, and needles of one curvature only, and are of three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all of these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these things to do are cutting, and there are some that don't cut more than one side, from which we scrape the flesh because for that reason we don't cut the vein nor the nerve. 
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers are the alembles put back in handles so that the patient doesn't feel them at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three ways. 
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Large, small, and medium, as you see.  
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one shouldn't use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and  groins, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And never is the other instrument made small, seeming like scrapers of fists, according to this form, for which one stanches blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And place it once at its place which is safe from cutting of the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they appear like a woman's breasts. 
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he should be according to this form of these lines b. to g.:  
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh from growing back, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast leans down and is softened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts above it, in two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b. up to line g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. 
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it has soaked up the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.  
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are types of hard scrofulas that have ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore who contain moisture it behoves that they be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure with ointment thereafter as long as it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofulous sores, then treat it as we said for cutting into scrofulous sores, and if the wound is hollow inward, apply cautery as we said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is sealed, then many times abscesses occur, and this also happens to an inflamed vein and an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if you know this is for the artery, then the abscesses are long formed. 
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it at your hips, so you feel a tightening. 
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when this is for the vein, so there are red-colored appearances.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very large.  
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to discard the iron treatment, and the one who is at the top should also be discarded, and in the one who is inflamed of an artery felt from above the skin long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the cut like incisions, and beautifully depart the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered. 
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then put under it a needle, and let it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a doubled thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries which are in temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point the place which is between the two ligaments of an intromittor as long as the pus that is there issues, and let be cut open the abscess; 
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the cure that causes a bowel to close, as long as the ligament holds.  
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure those of ointment coming after those, as long as it is sound. 
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand those that you can from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and have the thread double so that you draw it from the other side. 
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess as I told you, or bind of one of the two parts as two arms of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not inserted far, reinsert another needle through all the pus and under the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in IV (four) lengths; 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity of the core and leave what is tied; 
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the damp cloth in wine and oil, then administer care of poultices and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are burnt or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And these happen more often to assistants and to shoulders, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the painful abscess, and its color seems the color of the body, and is in many positions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one constrains it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not felt throughout the body, but only below the heart; 
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and the one who is at the joints should not be covered with iron; 
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	For by chance there might go a contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin into a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root. 
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with the awl, and flay it, then drain it and stitch the wound together, and dress it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large swellings hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes in the belly and nowhere else a tumor occurs, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance like a boil, and the root is subtle, and the head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are some small and some very large ones; 
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and pus flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist and with fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the cup on the spatula is wide, and be in your presence the cautery to fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the hip joint often comes too great a flow of blood, and if it does not stop, then hasten to cauterize. 
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a thread of wool well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for days.  
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the thread of wool until it closes the artery, and ceases by itself through labor. 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, you fear to close them entirely for the belly, but you can well close half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cure the wound, and guard that you do not close the vessels which are of red color and poor in feeling and milk-colored. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is a festering abscess, and I will come to the cure of the ulcer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the tumor has increased
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the wound comes from cautery of a cut or splitting of the flesh, and is on the belly and in some places like those that occur in other cuts, or of blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or of windiness. 
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from the rupture of the flesh and the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all.  
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, then abscesses open by these signs: they are large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity. 
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, so feel to the touch, and the works are that you see if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So it is necessary that you leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be stretched straight, then grasp all around the abdomen. 
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to groan softly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upward to the entire large incision; 
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the us be bound by the linen; 
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess extended over the linen, and put your index finger into it, and search for the intestine; 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the cord, if untie it, and put the intestine out through the opening of the belly; 
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it with the pincers, and cut off the excess;  
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein goes against you, then go well around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make it pierce; 
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess onto four places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them in place as long as it pusses, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you cut it when it is subtle and pusses, then treat it as needed, and close the abscess as we have said. 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of it as is fitting, and solder the place.  
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the likenesses of sores, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron. 
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say the sore originates in the marshes, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and ancients said that when sores are in a place where one can scrape it like a sore that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, and must be entirely removed when it is at the beginning; 
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it does not behoove you to approach it, because I can never heal any of them. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed any of them before me.  
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge any time the patient of black mucus. 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him healthy if there is manifest swelling, then set the patient in a good place to do the work; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then throw your pins or ulcers, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides with nothing left.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow completely out, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding of the blood is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the bleeding is extinguished;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure of other cure until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.  
si est eclites soulement;	if it is illuminated only; 
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch with iron in these II similarities: 
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and hydropsarches, because it is a mortal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, look at if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as flux and solution of the belly and similar things. 
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then do as follows: 
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be trenches of II parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	at the point, and anyway do not be so far in that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and you cannot bleed him; 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the dropsy is increased towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you cut under the belly three fingers right below the navel; 
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is from the disease of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side of the belly three fingers;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is for the middle, whether to the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the split so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place; 
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the fascia as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or until it enters; 
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the fascia as much as the spatula comes to the view, and that is the place of the water, then pull out the tool, and push this instrument from where it is in this form: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of brass or archaut light metal, and at the bottom part there is a small hole;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and II from one side, and I from another; 
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that scribes cut the quill. 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top above is the edge, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now onto the instrument.  
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty therefore half or a third part, because if you empty more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he approaches death. 
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the heart which stops the opening which is on the leaf, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner.  
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat with water a small quantity.  
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this no day, and guard yourself from pouring in so long as there remains but a little of water.  
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him a lot of water, so he cures of the grave or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and he stays pale.  
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and he cures of drying medicines as long as he is well, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no holes in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If this is necessary, then he must quickly be able to pierce all with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or pertu the subtle clo of plum, and tie it and hold it thus for III days or IIII and when he wants to make urine, so be removed the clo, and makes urine, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The one whose hole is small, if it is medicated with the clo of flint as we have said, it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the prepuce in its place are pale, because none are born with the prepuce at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis.  
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad illness. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum extended as far as the width of a feather, so that the prepuce falls in the middle, as it should.  
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard yourself against the flowing of blood which often comes, and if it happens, use the bandage of those who bandage blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.  
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these albations come in the vein, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; 
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and some are malignant and some are not.  
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	So it is necessary that you prick them at the origin with a subtle needle, and cut and clean them all, then put soft cotton on top with Egyptian ointment.  
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is bad, of foul color and pus-filled, then you must bring a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the albation is in the vein, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the albation which is inside first. 
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is fused together, then treat it with fire.  
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, be sure the head of the bone is not pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its shaft and groin. 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to shave all that is black and corrupted, then cover it with a paste of honey and flour made from the bark of quince trees and vezies, then cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps in two types of arrangements together:  
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, for the removal of blood and for corruption. 
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the bone is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or lead a chain of lead into the bone and urinate the patient among.   
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it behooves you to scrape it with the sharp instrument, until the bonds are untied, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is a painful thing to discuss these, then it behooves you to scrape it with the spatula on no point of the head of the penis and of the skin; 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully separate them, and place there the subtle cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not become raw again;
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a wound of continuous healing like the others.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we perform this work of our will, and properly on children, then it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in the city, and with force, and with a whole knife; 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	since it was common for the foreskin to be two layers, and by chance if one cut above and the lower remained; 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Then it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and at the purification which is done in the city, the tip of the member is not well assured; 
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and at the purification of the penis by chance the iron escapes and the work is ruined, and many times they are born so that they do not need purification and I have seen it. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification which is made by force to the whole line of filament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if they are equally sized throughout the whole soul it tightens;  
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the child be well stretched over the skin; 
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only doing to him tying the thread around the penis so much, and then make him rejoice in all the ways that you can; 
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make him stand straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; 
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand to the penis and blow or heart, and pull it upward until the head of the penis is in. 
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the one to the other lien;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it as you will by the second tie to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the head upward gently and pull the head of the penis; 
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let blood flow drop by drop, because it is the purest 
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder I drape it with a cloth of egg cooked without tempering with rose water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat it with other treatment as long as it is healed 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of strength for fortification is this:  
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be kept and be sharpened, and the shoulders also as large as the hand equally 
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of fortification is when the veins inside are at the incision; 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the pus forms an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pass three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, let him leave it until the abscess is calmed, and lightly scrape it. 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you cut it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all. 
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat the wound then with powders from things we have said or treated of, and if you cut too much out and it goes above, it will do no harm. 
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed. 
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from an obstruction of stone, or blood clotted, or bowel, or flesh growth, or similar things that we have said in the division; 
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released and you see that it is retained because of the stone which is in or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; 
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's arms as much as he can. 
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine flows freely.  
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction to him with all the instrument which is called "syringe," of which this is the form:  
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be of silver, finely worked and light, like the feather of a bird. 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the handle be a palm long and a half, and let it be thin at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of extracting the urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the head with a bit of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe. 
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cut the superfluity of the fleece and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin from egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; 
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then put the syringe gently on the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly; 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and let the patient feel it come until the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless for those who lead or where it goes is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then the thread is put to all wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then it is extracted, and correct the urine. 
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood come in the bladder, or there is rot assembled there, and you see them distill liquids and medicine, then do to all the instrument that is called “clepsedre,” and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three perforations:  
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; 
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the leaves are sewn together so that the medicinal ointment is such that it stops the member well without addition, if one can draw out moisture from it, and push when necessary; 
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see to place your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and treat with the syringe that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw the moisture with the catheter, and then push the syringe back in strongly;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;  
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the subtle form of the enema with which one enemas the bladder: 
si est ci:	here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher.  
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and beneath to the groin where the limbs fall; 
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder in it, then tie it between the two breasts forming a band with a double thread, and heat the pot containing that moisture on the fire; 
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then put the head of the enema into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle in it, and pierce it roundly around. 
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put the strong thread into these pierced holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.  
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have just said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; 
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have said the difference between a stone embedded in veins, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one must work with a saw;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;  
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often happens more to children, and this is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety.  
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it opens the hare, and greatens the patient’s penis, and he often penetrates it, and then bends over. 
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And with many of these leaps, the foundations are broken.  
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And it is light for the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as much the middle, to those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the mucus that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and thrust them out and move them downwards, so that the hip descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it protrudes from its high place. 
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands, supported, and his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards. 
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then place it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the hip in the space, then hasten now to cut into the hip.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall to the touch at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent.  
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and thrust it into its base, and place the hip, and when you feel it with your finger, then move it towards the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press on your back, and thrust it out to where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut. 
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he thrusts the spatula cutting, which is its shape:  
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make between those that are between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And be straight over the stone, and your backsides be close or foundation, and be the cut through so that it is wide outward, and inward narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large. 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By adventure the press if the back which is or foundation, that it jumps out without work.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there are such stones which have angles, and edges:  
si est griés a issir;	if they are cut to be removed. 
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is one that is soft, resembling a gland, and round, whose passage is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To those then which have angles and edges, make the cut larger; 
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, then you must extract it with tweezers which are also like a file at the head, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape. 
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put below the instrument subtle bent at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the opening of the wound, and if the blood does not come out, then strain with vitriol. 
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, then put the largest one first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then the tract, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sewn up, and a larger wound must be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient: 
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine comes back through where his bowels cannot hold it.  
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nonetheless, you must try to treat him, or to break up the pliers, as long as you pull it apart in pieces.  
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put on top of it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; 
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then bind the patient's neck, and do not untie the band until the third day.  
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reduce it, then arise well its place of oil and water, then the cure of diaphynicon ointment and basilum ointment, until it be healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess arises in the wound and corruptions, and blood clots in the bladder, and as a result the urine is retained, which is known in this manner that it does not flow with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore put your point in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause it to rot. 
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound clean and dry and of silk, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you tie its two thighs together, and apply the medicines on top of the wound. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage leading from the penis, and caught there, and urine cannot pass; 
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	then treat it as I say now, that you cut it many times, and excuse the cutting through this treatment. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take one piece of iron in this form, and let it be shaped like three angles fastened to one stick.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder. 
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then push the forest onto the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone. 
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the forest in your hand at the stone poke and poke, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side; 
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If then comes forth the urine, then press your hand on that which remains of the stone which is within the rod. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it then breaks, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this because of any obstacle that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and the other above, then make the rod straight against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the threads, and cleanse the coagulated blood which is in the wound; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.  
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-knowing who discovers herself to her midwives, even when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of a man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, then you must procure a midwife well-knowing, and at pains find one, and if you cannot find one, then take no unchaste midwife;  
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present to him a woman who is well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her that she do what you command him concerning the inquiry of the stone; 
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look carefully if the woman is a virgin:  
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it befits him to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone; 
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she forces it under her finger, and he recommends that she put her finger or on the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it befits that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; 
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then stop on the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the buttock, where it is seen to appear, and feel the stone in that part; 
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his hip above or below the stone, and let the waist be at first small;  
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then push the loin in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can pass out, and know that many kinds of stones are there:  
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the stone does not come out, put in its place powdered vitriol, and hold it there for an hour as long as the wound is stained;  
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have instruments that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the vein is injured and it's from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the place and bind it with bandages and don't start again with this, and leave the stone and don't milk it at all, lest the patient die by chance.  
puis cure la plaie.	then heal the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the parts are dried, return to your work, as long as the stone remains in place.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	White viscous is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white phlegm that is from the center of the bowels, which contains the egg; 
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "phlegm," and it is properly found in the lining of the egg if one thinks that this is the other egg; 
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin of the bowels between the white phlegm that we have said;  
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and these do not have a similar name. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is of weakness that comes from the genitals, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the bowels, and this moisture can have many colors;
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or when it is colored declining to jaundice, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.  
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe,  it is long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the edges, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason people think that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the edges and the white like that, then one feels it well. 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe at all the intercessor quarreling, from which its form is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this then which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his ability and the replenishment of his body; 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him many cloths;  
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the bones;  
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spoon-shaped tool, and cut the skin of the bones along their length up to near the armpit, and let your incision be entirely straight dividing the skin of the bones until you reach the white bone, and gently peel it according to your ability;  
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the white bone plainly with water at the large opening, and draw out all the water, then put your tweezers in, and extend the white bone upwards; 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the root of the testicles, but only the scrotum; 
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all or in parts the  ribs with subtlety, that if you do not cut them wisely, the fluid will return. 
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the bladder is in your work, place it back when you have completed the work of the scrotum. 
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join together the two leaves of the root of the testicles with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels which are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the testicle with all its suspender, and extract the bladder, and treat it as we have said.  
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the fluid is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two veins. 
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you strike the other part just as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a soft cloth moistened with rose oil. 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another woolen cloth moistened with wine and oil on top, and place the two bandages on top, and put doubled cloths above, and tie it over the entire bandage according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and employ them with wool fleece according to this resemblance and they should be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation until the back, and the other at the armpit; 
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs over the two arms, and be all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the breeches; 
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at no time is medicine this cauterization in place of an iron scalpel, and it is that you take the cultellary cautery subtle, and strike the skin of the groin, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is uncovered; 
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it at once at that point, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cup in all ways you can, as long as you scrape everything clean; 
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep that the fire does not touch the eye;  
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more healing; 
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and make sure guarding against blood loss, and cut the work of size;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing else goes against you, or an abscess forms or blood loss or anything else, then cure what opposes you according to that which is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that the aquatic root is there, then make the patient sit on the elevated seat; 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess in the area below to the entire width of the spatula, and place the perforation through the length of the body. 
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the opening be wide so that all the liquid flows out.  
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and allow the remaining liquid to drain, then treat it until the wound is healed.  
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you pour a quill or instrument used to treat water in dropsy, whose form is described earlier.  
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, so will the patient's days pass.  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, for which it seems to me better one leaves it. 
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.  
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and even from the genitals; 
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by many causes.  
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to say by excessive sour and sharp humors which are spread to the genitals, or from percussion;   
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; 
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not feel pain, and it is a grievous abscess;   
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by adventure there are some grievous abscesses porous and pithy, and of a dark color, and sometimes comes from the outside of an artery, or from an inflammation of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is through an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.  
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it does not behoove you to touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its arrangement at the touch of the fingers, and you can well do the incision on this resemblance, and on the other veins.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you cut the core of the veins, then the point is on top, and the thread of white sephac, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the point.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the point is already joined with these veins, then it behooves you to draw the point, and cut.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is attached to the sephac, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that vein, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cartilage is or their rear, then you must cut it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, so apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling the burgeon, with the softening of the boils, and it moves painfully when the patient walks. 
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the cure of this malady is as well prepared as fearsome as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It behooves you to make the patient sit on a high seat, then bring the suspensory of the hips down to your knees, over all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters bind them, and extend them in shape.  
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with a broad sharp spade through the area of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples. 
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle where there is the double thread, and ties it to the first place where the worm came, and ties it straight to the other end. 
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and pulls out the corrupt moistures. 
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then he cures the wound as with the others where one injures a bowe, so that no vessel spills that nourishes one of the corners. 
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this comes no harm, and if to all the vessels comes life, it is necessary to draw the corners to all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment for the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the thigh
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The happening of this ramic so is by the section that comes or where it is placed, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either by a blow or from an extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes. 
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	Or from percussion, or from a jump, or from pulling, or lifting of heavy weights, and similar things.  
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is from an extension of the blow are that they happen poco a poco, over a long time, and do not come suddenly. 
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And is the abscess even up to the armpit, because the blow tightens the intestines.  
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sifac, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and are the abscesses diverse appearing, under the skin near, and it is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the sifac.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are trapped with the bowels, and held in there, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron fear, for which it is necessary to avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then it should be supported on his neck between your hands and lift his hips. 
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then is the heart above, and cut all the skin of the nails long. 
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then put inside the leaves of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue. 
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the skin that is under the skin of the nails, until the white flesh is uncovered on all sides. 
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then put your two index fingers in that which follows the nail, in that which is between the white flesh which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second flesh, and depart from what is behind the egg, and between the second flesh.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move with your right hand inside the heart of the nails, and be the white flesh on top to your left hand, and raise the egg to all the flesh toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the arm upwards, and untie what is behind the bandage. 
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And feel his flanks if he has any bowel wrapped or white and hard lump, and if you find none of these things, then bring him to the belly below. 
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or it has the thick thread made of X threads, and bring it into the back part of the lump, which is after the skin of the groin. 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are IV threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then join them one upon the other in manner of a cross, and tie the lump, which we have said is below the skin of the groin, with a strong band of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the shoulders with threads, and bind them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, lest any abscess come there. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the strip directly according to the first strip long two times that of the other one, and after these two strips leave down the soft part which is below the breast of the thighs the greatest of a two. 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; 
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part which is below the skin of the thighs, as much as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it in the wounds, and place the strip that we have said.  
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes is cauterized the whites (as we have said), after the incision, for fear of  discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the strip until it dries by itself; 
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if he delays in sitting, he should be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.  
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like the root that is joined to the living body, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting lightly above or below; 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess with those who work, as long as the vessels bleed;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.  
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them; 
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not remove any of the intestines from the bowels, and if they are removed, it is a little, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines descend. 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the abscess which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen its parts and open. 
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the cure is thus by cautery, as we have said before. 
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:  
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflamed to the width according to the quantity of three fingers.  
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the abscess which is under the skin that follows it, then take the rail and put it on the place appearing of the abscess.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And you press to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two appearing parts of the abscess above the head of the rail, and sew both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then withdraw the head from its socket and do not cover the wound or extend the limb or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of a hernia.  
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and care for the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The incision is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because those things that are within are softened, and it becomes visible. 
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring together the two lips with one suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three sutures or four firmly; 
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread. 
dou chastrement	Through chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that cauterization is common in our law, and for this reason I would like to not speak of it in this book; 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is only necessary for two manners:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and in his wisdom cures.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need cautery from some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	Therefore, I say that cautery is done according to two manners: 
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by splitting. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we perform by traction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joints are softened and pliable; 
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grasp them with your hand, until they are put back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the chastisement of size: 
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the animal steady, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut above each opening at the top, when you have well scraped them; 
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no pore through which the soft fat and the fine fat that is on the vessels may escape.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of chastisement is better than the one done by traction, because in traction, perhaps nothing remains from the joints, so that the animal desires lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then cure the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men:  
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one if it is that between the two sexes appears also as the figure of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and it is on the pointed part as well as a rod, and they will conceive.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care of the man and of the woman is that you cauterize the joined parts together, and cure them as other wounds. 
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.   
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is a joined part above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; 
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It behooves that you singe the superfluity of the tentigene to your hand or as one does, and cauterize it lightly; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not move it too much, so that bleeding does not come, then the treatment of other treatments until it is healed; 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another ulcer that is born at the mouth of the gums, and the lip, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this they called it in the ancient 'cow disease'. 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the treatment, and the cure until it is healed.
de erratique	of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natural by birth, or accidents by illness that came to it; 
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is due to joint disease, or syphilis subtle or thick, and is made by movement in the gums, or ribs, or under, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevent conception, and childbirth, and by chance flowers to have. 
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these things is by the regard of the bailey.  
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is appearing close by, if you want to [place it] on either side or to the back.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is subtle of syfac, and it is close to the two books, then you hurry, and say thus: 
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two finger indices together, and the woman be upon her back, legs spread.  
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then are the two books formed, as long as the subtle syfac is round, and be covered the stupor; 
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it upon the place, and lie the woman at home every day, so that she cannot stir.  
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the stylus is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with the spatula seeming to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stupor is of flesh born, then suspend it to the onech and the cope; 
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a bundle of egg.  
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a wide bandage of cloth, so that the wound may not close. 
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus it is kept long, and administer a tent of dry linen;  
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be cured with other dressings until it is healed.  
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a new birth, it is necessary to cover according to this manner, if it is not abscesses inflamed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is inflamed which is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without usual care, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened. 
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities to them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve curing. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are inflamed in the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, except for by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the hardened part with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder with blood-stopping medicines such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;  
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then puts his feet to the wall for an hour, then puts it in cold water. 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if there comes a decorrment of blood, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confection it with honey and aisil, and make an emplastrum of it on his back.  
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he strains, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If this is not the case, make him apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without hurting. 
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in lingonberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.  
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is quiet, treat the place with ointment until it is healed. 
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red and is similar to sharp resin, so it should be covered as I have said before.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marshes
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the marsh, such as boils and cancerous abscesses and herpe and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not like abscesses that boil; 
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether this abscess is hot at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not hurry too much to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased;  
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he leans, and supports his back and brings his legs together towards the sides of the leg. 
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; 
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then succeed the thrust towards the right rib, and there administer the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the channel, so that afterwards comes the form.  
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see administer this instrument, that you first make the thrust in order to know the depth of the channel, so that what enters within the instrument does not come more deep than it must, and that it does not harm the patient; 
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the channel with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him; 
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and that he holds the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatula level.  
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary that you put in the wound tender cloths moistened in rose oil, or in green-colored dry oil; 
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the cloth further from the wound to the edge of the margin, and place outside above the margin and on the linen blade net moistened in water or mallows being boiled. 
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then care for it after two days of ointment coming up to this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And at no time lift the margin and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristida being boiled;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is put back in its place, then you should guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first at the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air; 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Therefore, the child should quickly move with force  
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Therefore, know that this infant's birth is according to the natural form, and it is born under its head, and the second follows him; 
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is proper to gently press his belly so that the child comes out quickly.   
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	Because when he descends upon his head, the second follows him, and the womb is freed of its superfluities by good purification.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.  
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes on his feet, and comes toward the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes on his belly, or groin, and is converted by chance onto his neck, and by other bad figures; 
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes on his head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth hard, and the virtue of her is weak, then she make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and rouse her nature of oil or fennel is cooked, and then put the healer between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the secondary bone, and cut to its nail until the moisture which is inside it exits. 
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek with sesame oil. 
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour:  
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	then now extract the child. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out first, then it is necessary that you gently pull them little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high; 
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then unseat the stool on the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the unsitting.  
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hand cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the elbow that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and reset it evenly. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes upon its feet, then it should be pushed upward.  
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it back and forth, until it is even. 
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then pull it by the feet and extend it back and forth.  
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When he jumps to his hips, then command him to take hold, and make him sneeze from congestion. 
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it were to jump further, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not good as we have said, so turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore then there is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come further as we have, then say take muscle of aloe and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all in the mortar; 
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the woman's inside nature and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a deep well until below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is softened beneath, make a collar of mirr, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour. 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on the seat, then make them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently grasp their belly, for the child now jumps. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, put the basin on their hands back and forth;  
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be sewn to their neck, and let their feet hang down, and lie down on the bed; 
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend their hands back and forth, and then take their hands on their belly, and take away the cushions beneath, until she is well prepared down below; 
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, take their feet and move them, then move their belly upward, and then put your hands in.  
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and beat the child peck and peck; 
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to prepare herself until the child is born.  
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: 
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up, and go away.  
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and straighten out her legs; 
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the poultice that I have recounted.  
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand; 
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and beat the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to prepare herself until the child is born. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned toward the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it peck and peck, and beat it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, put on its muscle tissue of altitude and oil, as we have said, then command him to move it a little here and there. 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you will have done this, put the part on its seat, and command him to feel it.  
et la fai esternuer.	And then make the part sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to all the spine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to be done in this manner to the whole joint, cut the joint with your fingernail, until the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child cannot rise on his face and neck, then cut the skin of the wound so that it is not held back, and kill the child. 
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as it is right, and command the woman to feel it no time.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it will be gently extracted. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four.  
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live, if they are named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know these, that they be multiplied, and are destroyed by the power that divides them, which is linked to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come forth as naturally as one each under, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come forth struggling, so the cure as we have said, and let the midwife be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and make thus as he will cure to health. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No times are formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more until XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this because perchance similar things happen; 
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if made according to what is fitting. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; 
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is fitting that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or she has fear of death; 
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is fitting that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips be inclined down, and the legs raised; 
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister the braid from the two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not pulled at the descent of the child
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mare's with moist oils with marshmallow and fennel seeds and flaxseed, then anoint the bailiff his hands with these oils and these poultices
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them in the mare lightly, then quench the place where she puts her hooves to be convenient for them, and take guard if the child is appeared that it descends upon its head 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if put the hooves in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or under its tongue or beneath the beard or in the groin or near the ribs, and if the descent is upon feet, put it where the pin prick and at the middle ribs 
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is convenient that he braids the hoof with his right hand, and put the crook between his two of the left hand, and put it into all his hand lightly, and put the hoof in any of these places that we have said, as long as it comes to the thing empty
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the onchne: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fit against the other onchne, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; 
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then make them equal in moving from one side and the other, so that they may slip easily, and let the onchnes be toothed so as to hold well, as it is here the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then oil the root with some of its oil, and put it in that part, and draw the other part; 
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if none remains, then put this onchne or higher up, and do so until it comes all out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back for the tightening, then you must wrap it on the blanket until it comes out all;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then hold the head in the joint of the foot or on the knife, and thus you must do with the other hand, and at II feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if there is a sharp chief assembled, then you must insert the pointed spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the sharp.  
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will do it with the instrument that is called "almidach", so that the shape comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one. 
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus the same if the child has a large head naturally.  
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with the tongs, and if the head jumps out and is strained to the forceps, then it is broken, as long as the moisture which is at or lower exit.  
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot move, cut it up into pieces as much as you can. 
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the mare is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is protruding in the belly or breast, it is necessary that you draw it out with the cloth wrapped around your hand. 
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and bind the belly or breast, until the moisture inside runs out.  
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are broken and the shoulder remains, put the basin in their palm with the mouth of the basin facing up, and draw it up to the mouth of the basin.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then put the pincers or tongs into it, and pull it out forcefully.  
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the basin is narrowed because of the hot abscess that has come there, it does not need to be worked on. It is necessary instead to administer moist and fatty things
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the minister plasters, and soak them in softening and moistening water. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, administer those that we have said for a living child. 
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one has no power, then it is treated in pieces, and nothing of the second part is left.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer those that we have said for boils that come in the marsh. 
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if bleeding comes, then it is put in restraining water, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead, then she conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time he came to have an abscess on his head, and it swelled so much that it opened and began to discharge pus greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not solder the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong traction, and out came one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was much amazed, because this one whose belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I sought the wound, and treated with my hands bones, as long as the woman was in a better state; 
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived for a long time like this, and it came to be a little bump of bone from there.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter for those who, when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.  
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here after comes the form of the pressor, as it is written in books; 
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to its turning as to the two shoulders of the two limbs.  
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and its mouth of the barrel it must be wide, and the edge of the trees it must be long one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same barrel, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or an inch more.  
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the collar to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of tongs. 
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two arms adjusted, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide; 
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the matrix with the entire instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then put the two arms adjusted together in the matrix, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; 
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then operate your hand with the entire instrument, as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the matrix, as long as the patient does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is all mounted, and are multiplied their appearances; 
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the mirrors show them clearly, then it is more demanding the work, and higher for men because of their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the tool that you may have prepared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it behooves you to command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze forcibly, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose.  
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she leaps for this, well is. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that does not happen, then take a pot, and make an incision or coverlet, and put herbs there that may open the mouth of the uterus, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. 
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, be boiled or stewed in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cane or opening of the pot, and the other chief in the mouth of the uterus, and keep it so that the vapors come inside the uterus. 
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the back of the hip jumps suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this cure and there is no force, command the woman to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in the juice of rue, and then put it into the vagina, and pull on the second time;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, seize it and extend it back and forth gently so that the strings do not tear during extraction; 
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it should be moved gently left and right, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	Then it will come out and disentangle itself.  
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the opening of the vagina is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigating with herbs.  
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if she is not cured by all that we have said, then beware that you do not pull 
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then the cleanse with ointment tetrafarmascon. 
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she endures and puts it back, and comes for; 
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when she endures this, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and paleness occurs to the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore it is necessary fumes suitable to these;
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and of the second is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is to be seen resembling a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the fire, and the shoulders wide over the fire; 
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be over the embers, and the wool until it is scorched, and begin another one. 
de percier lou fondement	to examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but rather have it stopped by some subtle syphons;
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it befits the surgeon to pierce him with that instrument in its place, and do not pierce him at all with a sharp spatula, and guard the bandage so that she does not touch it. 
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place upon the wound half in wine and oil, then the ointment's cure until it is healed.  
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will return, then put or place a piece of wood, and leave them hands for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And at no time comes this stoppage of a wound or an abscess;  
si covient coper celui soudement:	Therefore it befits to cover that stoppage. 
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If it is cured, as we have said of the chain of flax.  
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodules, and greater than those that come near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.   
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodule is ancient, it works, and in short moisture white or subtle boils, and at no time are these fistulas pierced. 
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by those who have experienced it or by flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps in jumping some of them go out.  
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if to fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the junction of the groin, and up to the knot of the scrotum.   
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the base, and not penetrating; 
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you insert your index finger or base, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.  
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine linen or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no coming out of pus or windiness or humors, as we have said: 
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce;  
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry to cure it. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced as far as the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes as far as its place;  
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of pain around it, then it is that there is something added below it, and it does not take medicine or treatment by ointment;  
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and vanity of foolish mirrors that intervene. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not persistent and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly. 
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then put a tent of lead, or of plaster if there is curvature, until you know where the tent comes from. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the base, then it is necessary that you put your index finger on it, if you feel then that the tent has pierced it.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And be discovered where you feel between your finger the sifac or the flesh, then you know that she is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not travel with this one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says nevertheless that one can heal them well, but this happens little.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid one does it if one scalds the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And put all hot in the fistula, until it comes near to the foundation. 
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred parts are burned, which look like an owl's feather; 
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then cure it with damp tents in butter, until those charred parts are gone, then cure it with ointment containing sulfur and lead. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent goes in and does not reach to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of charcoal or  syphax, and you see the fistula following this covering toward the heart; 
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	Then cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then use the cautery after it until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered the tent, and will fall; 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then  remove those feathers that seem like an ostrich feather, and no remaining any.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound festers, and it comes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles two things good: 
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of those joined hairs, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture. 
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in ground hazelnuts, until the wound is covered, and if the hairs are burned in the bottom; 
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wounds of those swollen eyes by applying a hard dry dressing, and they are the dry medicines.  
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to right through the bottom of it, and is separated from the body, then you cut it at its base or foundation, and ask about those.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent and there is between it the linen or the silk or hairs, and it is close to bursting, then there is no other way but by the administration of one of these three ways: 
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put dressings on it and treat it as before. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the eggs flow by their own volition. 
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;  
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the membrane after it is cut from below its foundation, or by dressing or another pointed instrument.  
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then carefully remove the fatty tissue in the wound as much as you can;   
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation. 
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	so it will be a lighter thing for the patient.  
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And at no time are fistulas in this manner: 
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the base near the skin above, then take a perforated tent at the head according to this form:  
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it puts the thread wrongly into the second, and pushes the tent all along the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is inserted into the edge of the base inside, then you should extract the thread of the one pierced, as when you put your own or base.  
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and treat the head with thread, and assemble the two shoulders together, and bind them to each other, and let it so for a day or two; 
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no times, as long as the threads cut these flesh that are between two, and shrink;  
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound as long as it is soldered and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make a bandage cover them if they are pierced, and then treat them, as we have said, until they are healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very strong, one part and trenching;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other part no, for this reason one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here: 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhages are according to two manners: 
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short near blood, and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are outside have little moisture, and yet inside or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of flesh; 
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch in order to go into chambers, as long as the foundations are gone, and the threads appear; 
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and can hold it with tongs, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots; 
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder over some hot powders that are in place of cautery; 
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, then cure them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, then make a suppository for the patient with a biting and harsh suppository to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly; 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the patient cannot bear it, and if the threads are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; 
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you shall seize them with your finger or pliers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pass through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be of a wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put on the foundation, a piece of soft cloth in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.  
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it until they are healed, and when they are closed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are well. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Of the drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying of humors within the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not work.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the crust above, so that it does not become moist. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then cure it until it is cured as it is necessary.  
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, then begin scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and becomes scabby. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it until it is healed.  
dou fremit	Of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A foment is a small appearance of pus around the body, and goes well inward; 
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the vein is found cold, and it feels like death from numbness, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.  
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a stalk of an owl feather, or a strong vulture feather, and put that stalk on the numbness, until the purple circles feel the numbness all around. 
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand on the whole stalk until you wrap all around the numbness, and put it in completely, and scrape the numbness from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make this one of an iron or steel chain according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce it, for if you do it will hold at the vein, and you will squeeze it more.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, then cauterize the numbness as it is in the chapter of cautery before this one. 
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or arch-gold, or melted lead or maillet.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and at times one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.  
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those who are given to administer in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the clyster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if one has a severance where the belly is tied together, as you see, and the shoulder blade is pierced inside; 
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and has two pierced on one side of the rib cage, and one on the other;   
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly where one puts medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and has between each hole one doit of spacing, then put into these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in the shape of an X or otherwise around, and assemble the belly as it is a sheep; 
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, then tie the end with a strong thread in front, and then clisterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with clyster of oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently;  
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then squeeze the ministers with both hands together until it is all mixed, then withdraw the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to go out, so let it go as much as possible; 
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night long, then there is greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clench it for a malady of stomach ache, and the medicine comes out quickly, then he starts again until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the base or an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster that the skin should be tightened with; 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have just said in the division the cure of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and from how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and the edge of a sword and knife, or spear or club or arrow, or similar things. 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; 
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the cure of each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance comes in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you guard yourself because it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly an abscess hot: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the head is bled forthwith if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the bloodletting be opposite to the afflicted part
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to be bled, then let his meat be lessened, and drink no wine, nor eat any meat; 
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; 
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess there, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I shall say a little after; 
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tents, then assemble them by stitching, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the stitch.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds on only by a bit, then cauterize it. 
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in its place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as tests and cooked wheat, also pulses, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cauterize all the rottenness, and throw out the pus, then heal it. 
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cauterization, and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then their cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put within this powder which joins as if the fire had melted it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is: 
pren encens une partie;	Take incense one part;  
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;  
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; 
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell;  
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.   
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with coal alone, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has cauterized the wound, even if it is still open, then one does not put any of this powder;   
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour, water and honey, until it heals well.   
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure of other cures until he is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers; 
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.  
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat; 
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, such as chaulmoogra oil washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped laurel also washed in sweet water, and other medicinal stones in this manner, and moist unguents. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so sew it together and tie with bandages, then treat until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is full of pus, then pierce or lower than.  
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then stop it, tie it, and cauterize as is necessary. 
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is guarded, so that the flesh goes through, then sew the heart onto the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.  
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then restrain it properly, and leave it for a few days, then cure it with soothing ointments until it is healed.  
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then fill it. 
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, try to pull out all the ones that you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound dries up and is aligned properly. 
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, see if air escapes from the wound as the patient breathes. 
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then you know that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up so that the blood does not clot, returning to the heart, and killing the patient. 
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But put on attractive ointment, and reapply it twice a day;  
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on their wound for three days, or four, or more.  
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there does not come any spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor straining of wing.  
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, then you know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat then with tents and other treatments, as long as it is healing; 
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and work, then you know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	then treat it as one should. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as described above.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, suture it; 
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, cover it with powder, and if it is deeply set in the bone, and has broken pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose; 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not severed, let the wound rot, it will lessen the extractions 
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other members judge as we have said.  
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; 
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines come out, by which the intrusion of others; 
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the large one, for this reason one puts the intestines back in with more care, if they are not put back in hot to hot.  
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	for that reason the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they go in with more care, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestine to its place just like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IV manners. 
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The II sutures common occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and II other sutures proper are common to other wounds; 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And nevertheless they are more clean with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and declare.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has been outside, and it is necessary to stitch, it is by one of the II manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated by the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	half a sponge or I soft cloth in hot water only, or you cook it in hot wine with cinnamon and cloves, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes doing this restraining, it is moved that  it alone for deflating. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling departing, if moist the intestine of water or ale and bad be cooked, for by this it is aligned the entrance to a little thing. 
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument of which one cuts hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first cure is to move the tail, that one should not cut it without great necessity. 
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the tool for splitting it. 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if trench inside in the curve and outside not, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has leapt out, set it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then it behooves you to make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; 
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your intention in that the sunken part be higher than the other. 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it behoves to administer what I say in large and small wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Little wounds are placed where you have appeared, then hold in your hands the minister pitiful that holds all the rupture with his hand, and bring together the lips.  
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common way of stitching, and is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one point of space, and there put a needle where it has the good strong thread; 
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the suture which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that side, and bring together the two heads of the suture the four assembled. 
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then bring together the two ends of the wound in agreement, and then leave one point of space, and there put another needle; 
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then take the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what you need needles for, until all the wound is restrained. 
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because fine needles cut all the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter well: 
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore, they should be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And it is not good to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then trim the ends of the needles so they don't hurt the patient when they sleep, and put tents or cloths on the needle points to keep them in place, and leave them there until the wound is closed; 
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this way of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because only one or two needles are needed. 
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the jaw together with a needle to which there is a strong medium thread. 
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced these four bones together, then turn the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews the fabrics. 
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a minor vein two;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This suture sews a man, and I sewed a wound on one's belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it had intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was healed up to XV days, and I treated it, and he became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.  
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and lay on top of the wound cotton old twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:  
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and pass it from the outside part to the inside; 
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the flesh straight through, lay the head of the thread on the spot where you have passed the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside out; 
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier sews furs, and that you leave the thread on one side once, and take it from the other, until the stitch is completed.  
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suture, as Galens says properly, is like any wound which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one end to the other end, in this way: 
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle or point of mirache nearby, and have it pierce the place only, and leave the two ends of the suture.  
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and have it pierce from the outside part to the inside, with the two ends of the suture. 
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then have it pierce one and both from the outside to the inside, with two other points of mirache that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the middle manner of suture and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galens says this word, and no one contradicts it, one must suture the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each. 
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must thrust one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corrodaries. 
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the belly, the suture is more grievous than of the other parts of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the arterie has moved, then put back the intestine and stitch. 
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on powder enfearing flesh, and if the arterie has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And stitch the thread, and join the skin, and the cartilage. 
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as with others, until it is healthy; 
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you have no medicines, put on it at once as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healthy.  
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple; 
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a soft cloth in oil of temperate heat, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; 
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if it feels pain or rot in the bowels, and this happens many times, then you should administer enemas of dark wine, even if the rot comes to the intestines; 
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it inward, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is because of the placement of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh. 
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has become black or worm-eaten, then you must tie the place that is black so that bleeding does not come from it, for there are veins and arteries. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the two, and place the two ends on the part below the wound until outside to align the extraction when the worm falls, and the wound bows. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people because I have seen a man who was pierced in the belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And was the wound on the right of the stomach, and was infected and became a fistula, and in it there was evacuation and flatulence. 
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the edges joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it join, I feared that the patient had badly in his belly; 
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he felt no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And said any experimenter that when it has a small wound in the intestine, that it must be bound in such a manner: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take fresh strips of linen, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the strip has covered the opening, put it on the two lips so that it pulls its mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	And then the physician cuts the head, and it is held so that it cannot be separated, then he puts the other fragment afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely taken.  
et cout la plaie.	And sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	That chief if it is ardent in the intestine, and there comes no nuisance to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast, in such manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the chief of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned, and then tie to the chief of this thread the fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it in the rupture.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of sewing of fragments is not worse than according to the way of trust and hope; 
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the main intestines, there is nothing nor health, except subtlety.  
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is closed and goes inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to truth a knotted fault hard and white, where one feels no pain, and is also pointed like the feather of an eye. 
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear bow, and other times thick;  
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and other times enough; 
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the IX causes:  
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body. 
ou por sa malice;	or for its evil.   
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, that does not allow new flesh to grow; 
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much moisture.   
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the limbs are spoiled, and the matter is of bad quality. 
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	when the medicine is not good in the cure 
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence;  
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and tardy for healing, and inflated by nature; 
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones.  
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is therefore necessary for me to teach you the treatment of fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; 
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sifac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it is such that it comes from the property of the principal member, and similar ones.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of evil healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance; 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in its cure, and you want to know it, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, so if it is curved; 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, then take a search of a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends and goes around the twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then have it clattered through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and purifies it; 
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then search carefully with your power that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is covered by them, and ask the patient well of the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the bad matter and corrupted flesh that are within;  
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from right place, then it befits that you cut it deeper, as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal water, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is lodged at the bottom;  
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put dressings of sound flesh, until it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by these means, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not touch or principal members, as we have said; 
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then cover it as long as the corruption is completely removed, then treat with things that create healthy flesh until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed and returns bent as before, know that you have not gone all the way. 
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If it is uncovered and wants to stay bent as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is thus healed, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it.  
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature; 
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small bone that has rotted, and you can extract it with pliers, then extract it with a suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind; 
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, then cut through both the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, place something on the wound that prevents rotting, and leave it until the flesh around the bones has rotted away, and then they will come out more easily. 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then leave just the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound. 
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of corruption, and it comes up to the flesh of the bone;  
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it must be cut and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed. 
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help with your work.   
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the substances came to the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open it. 
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the mire by their foolishness worked so much that the abscesses opened, and they rotted much matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all lay raw and moist of the body. 
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many mire they put care to II years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I came to them, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were curing him, and what rotted through the pus to great extent. 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and it became red the body of the youth, and had a color of citron.   
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened therefore, and cauterized in one of the pus until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inside bone.   
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was the one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except for the one that I removed; 
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicinal sodas for a long time, and it could not heal; 
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I took it out, and I was sorry to sew the place together; 
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not more than I sewed around a palm of the bone, and it was brought to its full form, then I restored it with medicines; 
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and sewed together quickly, and it did not need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and because of the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed entirely, and in the place of the bone grew hard cartilage, and was of good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary from all things, neither to go nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take a linen cloth, and tighten it to the head of the bone that is open, and command whoever holds it to extend it upward; 
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And put another linen cloth larger than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, extending the head upwards, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to see, so that the sinew does not cover the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put a splint or a board under the bone to make the corrupted flesh covered. 
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it must be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be done again another time.  
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely. 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put I tinder underneath, and then silk from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silken thread long as the length of the corruption as we have said; 
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the corrupt joint, and silk the bone where it contains from the other part; 
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, so there is nothing else than to cut it;  
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is where the finger of the hand, or where the finger of the foot, so it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it opens to you; 
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not make contrary; 
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and silks to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of each, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; 
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument; 
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; 
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so think about the instrument which you have need for according to what is fitting.  
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can be dislocated either from within or from without; 
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes by this either from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the lack of the limb; 
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes that corruption of the limb from limb, and takes over the whole body; 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to cover it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the arm, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come until the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes until the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come to the arm. 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes to the arm, then cover it with the knife.  
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no use for remedies other than the quantity of its power. 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And thus do all this when the corrosion comes or bites;
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes in the first joint, then cover it after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or bites, then cover the whole bite. 
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up the leg, cut at the knee joint; 
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;  
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to cut or saw the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on the lower lien, and others ministers the other lien above, and you sever the flesh which is between the two liens at the spathume width, until the bone is uncovered; 
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or saw, and put on each side the drapery of linen so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess caused. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the place heavily, or put on some powders restraining; 
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed. 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you that it happened to the man in his foot:  
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot; 
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed;  
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long afterward the corrosion returned to his heel of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that were applied after the purification of the body, and it could not cease the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it is said that I should bind his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of returning the matter. 
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the virtue of the man was weak; 
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to bind his hand, and became healthy.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I do not recount this tale for any other reason than that one should do otherwise if one has need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place and remains so long that it makes a great assembly of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and out jumps the pus, and remains its vessel, just like a vial.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is on top is as subtle as a fine linen cloth, and does not reach down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy', and is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone and makes a hole, then it is called "fistula";  
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure for this is that you cover that skin all around, and also when it is thin, like a cloth;  
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not let it be exposed to its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have a suspicion that the skin is exposed, and the corruption is not in full depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus with a clyster:  
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breast is large, and the bow that surrounds it smells foul, then administer a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made thus:  
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take equal parts of resin, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey; 
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take of these according to your need, and make it in vinegar and honey, and in suppositories the breast, and restrain the opening.  
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine stay in for II hours, then withdraw it by squeezing. 
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breasts are calmed, and the pain is removed. 
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And no time is it a suppository of water from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top, then let it drain, and in the suppository, as long as you know that the breast is well calmed. 
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water from ashes, then the suppository of water and honey or where there is a bit of litharge ground.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey may have the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the flesh air. 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the intestines is well purified, then cleanse it with that which causes flesh to be born in it, and that you take a plaster diaphinit, and make it with rose oil and wine; 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments;  
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the intestine is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, as long as it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only as much room as the enema can enter, and if the opening that spits out blood is above, then cut or more lower where it is.  
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in its proper place, do not let flesh encroach. 
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner that the bowel goes to its lowest point, for when the bowel is in place, do not let flesh encroach, and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, arrange it in such a way: 
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel runs gently downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel; 
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast, and be above the linen sheet that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as forcefully in the place of the opening of the breast a little larger than the first, then be ointment on top of the other sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the opening of the breast to align the bowel, and do not remove the large sheet outside except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is on the chest through the lung, bone often to remove the bowel, and knows those that run from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible. 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take guard if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been in this manner extended and you see the nature that leaps on the lung through the chest, then know that the breasts are already healed, and approach the saints. 
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.  
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed improperly after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and some who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested bowel leaps from the chest after many days, know that the breasts are not healed.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to heal and are swollen, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaphinit, because it has a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine. 
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equal in substance;  
puis le confit et en use;	then boil it and use it; 
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and the same way make honey boiled and mixed in, when the ointment diafinit is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is off the fire; 
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then put it in a cloth and place it on the breast, and at no time is administered one aristeloge long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also as flour of rice and hundred-flower;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or composites: 
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them and make powder, and put on the honey I have said, and use it;  
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard members, or limbs; 
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.  
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panaritium is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the hand, or foot, or by chance may arise in other places;  
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes, and rots and breaks open so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance corrodes the whole nail; 
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corrosion to the bone, as long as there comes pungent pain, and the head is of the two large, and the color is pale. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cut away all the superfluity that is remaining from the wound, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick, and bleed, it is necessary that you put a little cloth under the nail that does not touch the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines hot and corrosive in order to remove everything;  
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat further, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;  
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the joint is corrupted, cut it with the knife as it has been said before, then treat it until it is healed; 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken and bruised, and the patient feels great pain, then you must heal it first;  
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the joint with the sharp spade by cutting across from above, and guard that the cut does not reach to the flesh which is below the joint, because the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on top that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in any of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born with no bone in the joint do not move, and those who are born with a joint in the bone may sometimes move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The waist of a fleshy person is light, in such manner: 
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the waist at its root with a broad spatula.  
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: 
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it to cut.   
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be at the last our, it is fitting that you cut first the flesh roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable line for it, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The seizures that come to the two joints come by birth, or by wound welding, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cut that suture so that the limbs repay according to their natural forms;  
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together;   
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of fine lead until the joints are fused, as is necessary.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a seizure comes upon one of his two hands with the palm, so seize that seizure as it befits.
des vils	of evils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, that come into many members of the body; 
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they happen more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary for you to administer once purge of oil, and then heal with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of iron is according to II manners: 
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that one cuts them and draws out the black blood;  
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you open the vein and draw it all out. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done in this manner: 
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, raise the leg in hot water very strongly, until the thick veins are softened, then restrain the leg of the sick person from above the hip to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in I place, or in II or in III, with a wide incision, then  draw out and draw all of the black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the sick person can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command him to stay on meats avoiding black coal; 
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And recommence the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harms the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The raising of the limb is according to this manner: 
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Rub the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cut the spot on the vein of the long in the knee joint, or below in the part of the ankle;  
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then work the skin with the awl, and peel the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; 
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the point below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then you put it on the awl lightly, then cut it in the other place above 3 fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, as you have done, and place it on another needle, as you have done first.  
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another piece, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut it at the double point of the foot, then treat and lift it until the second piece.  
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it piece by piece, until it is all drawn out, then cut it. 
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot draw it and lift it, then put a needle into the whole strong thread double, and tie it and pull it, and put it below the root, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out. 
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep that it does not cut, because if it cuts, then one cannot draw it nor lift it, and it comes to annoyance for the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it completely, place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and tend to it until it is healed.  
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enveloped all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crosswise, but do not completely cover it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously said.  
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to cut the vein should be curved and not straight so that it does not cut into the vein; 
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that has no moisture;  
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it is born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body serpents and worms, nestled between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to swell out as much as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two finger widths, and knot it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time there is a point at the outside, wrap around the plank, and knot it. 
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, so you cut a part of it, and wrap around the remaining, and do not cut it at its root, as long as it is all out. 
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, so it goes back into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and rot there, and bad illness. 
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore for that reason it is necessary that it be treated piece by piece until the head, and nothing remain in the body. 
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein when it is treated with V palms of long, or X, and one man came to me once whose it was X palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out I rays or porous, and it pierces until the bottom, so that all flows through; 
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And be emptied of the matter which is within, and administer at the place medicines preventing rot any day, then cure it as the abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes at this vein main veins, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes out much of porous, and from which it leaps out. 
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure therefore as we have said before.  
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land “disease of the ox,” because it happens many times to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and one feels it well at the edge of limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the rotting of some humors, such as come to worms and rubbish and roundworms in the belly 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; 
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.  
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and milked, one cannot flee except when it goes: 
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so it behooves you to tie the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut on top and milk it forth, and if it goes into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said; 
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow form, then cut above, and the wound treat. 
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to use the patient with purification of body and medicines solvent for the ill humors corrupted, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vakir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I poked after, and I saw it rise as a worm to the shoulder, faster than any thing, like living silver when it cuts from its place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that place and goes into the shoulder, and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.  
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw it. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I wanted to move the pain from that place to another, but I didn't want it to happen, as I saw it in the woman. 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and for that reason appeared that constricted windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins covered. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then place the hand on top and below gently, and then cup over until that constricted windiness in its place is gone. 
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place; 
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those who drive out wind, such as foul pills and  seraphim pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and soldered; 
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those which fall in any member if they fall according to two manners:  
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in principal member such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.  
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you hereafter, appear to you:  
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Then it is necessary that you guard yourself against the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; 
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.  
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syphax which is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without being stuck in the nostrils, or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice; 
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps from the wound moist white like to poultices, and jumps also as if burned flesh;  
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, so hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside.  
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it lies in the chest, are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were lodged in a hard thing, not hollow. 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were the finger, and a dark blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore know without doubt that death ensues. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that pierces low is that without plains of foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs.  
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and throws great pain and great suffering and sighing; 
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders.  
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls or stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound any thing of undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and there is no point of sinew by the intestine rout, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.  
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and thighs and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man with an arrow which fell into the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I drew it from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was cured without feeling at all. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew it with a tool an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye beneath the paper and beneath, and the arrow was renewed, and I could not reach more than the tip toward the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkic bow, to all the iron light without ears; 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The wound was healed, and he did not have any bad accidents.  
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And treat an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:  
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the barbs, and skillfully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And treat an arrow to the man, that he had in his belly, and thought he would die;  
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after XXX days, he did not improve his condition; 
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and I gripped it, and extracted it fully, and there was no bad accident.  
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if this man who had an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound was closed above; 
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and remained the arrow inside him, and did not change his natural conditions, nor felt annoyance in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And behold another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and his wound was closed.  
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus enduring great pain; 
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there happened an arrow to the prince's man,  the king, who was lodged in his neck, and was slightly declining toward the right side; 
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was wholly embedded. 
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the cure after it had been lodged for three days.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought it with a very subtle probe, and did not feel it at all; 
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was a feeling of prickling and pain below his right ear.  
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought that it was from the point of the arrow. I placed upon its place a plaster atractive and digestive, for that the place did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and appeared to me the wounds of the arrow. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on that day, and sutured the wound directly, and kept the patient there for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his flesh. 
et il le me dist.	and he told me.   
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for several days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened in place; 
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it took four months to penetrate well, and then I widened the wound so that I put in pliers, and grasped it on both sides, and it couldn't issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to devise and engineer ways of instruments, until I took the day with pliers well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I drew it out, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the wise judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: 
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you apply your cure to those things which I do not say, because the books cannot contain everything. 
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters compare with very little things, and on those which are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the advancement of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows are not from the members where they are fixed further than according to two manners:  
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the place where they enter, or by another part; 
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which is further by where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and never being pulled out at all now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not move now, let it stay until the pain is gone, and let the wound be cleaned.  
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot move, let it stay so for some days, and move it each day.  
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then if it moves, and if it does not move, pierce around the entire forest subtly, until the area around is enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient:  
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Do not treat it, but let it stay until it is healed after some days, because if the arrow comes as far as the pia mater, then death will follow. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed further than in the bone only, and does not come to its tip, and the patient stays for some days without bad accident, then the machine of the milking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very tightly fixed like this and cannot be moved further, then administer hot poultices around it as I have told you. 
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the place until it is sound.  
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body and if one cannot see it, then cover the whole wound. 
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;  
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot by the widening of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins, then widen it as much as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base where it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck from both sides to as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can so that you can extract it.  
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful that you do not break the arrow, but that you extract it more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then leave it until the surrounding tissue is softened, then treat it, for extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood is against you, then administer what we have said about its treatment in our chapter;  
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard yourself from the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put as much care as you can to extract the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, then put him according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees or feels nothing clearly, or the skin is swollen in that place: 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then cut there, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it:  
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it leaps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then drive it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.  
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, pull out the whole shaft: 
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if the shaft has broken, and you see to administer medicine, then administer the instrument that is shaped like a hook so that the point of the arrow goes into the curve of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pull it out, and if the arrow is broken, insert the instrument with its tip entering in to aid in extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or to the bladder or to the ribs, and it is close, and you can cover above, then hit it; 
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if need be;  
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the care until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways of this: 
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.  
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the blunt point is like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as here it is the form.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for inserting and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins from which one is healed there are XXXI, so it has or head XVI, that is to say: 
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two bats that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbesch";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; 
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is removed from the forehead 
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the head near the nose;  
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two veins that are on the neck; 
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augueherich"; 
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are below the tongue.   
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins in which one commonly bleeds are  V in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and is on the inner side of the left arm, and the common people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; 
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilica is located on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the fossa, and it is the one that is used to draw blood, which opens clearly on the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the cephalic vein is the one that is between the thumb and the little finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: 
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one of which is under the bend of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; 
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "femoral", which is in the ankle of the other side; 
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg there are III veins below those 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bloodletting of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and migraines;  
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a rope, until the II veins appear behind the ears in their two dependencies of the head: 
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	which then to your back, and where you feel the pulse below your back, so seize with your hand;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand to all the vein above, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers deep, and make blood flow as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then restrain and bind, until it is healed; 
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.  
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, and for sore eyes, and for habitual eye pain, 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the drainage are as I said:  
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient strains his neck until the two veins appear openly; 
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below his shoulder, and then signs of  it. 
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then gently raise the vein towards your right index finger, and insert the lance below it, and lift the vein upwards, and make the cut, just as you did with the other two veins, and draw out blood according to your need. 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then untie the patient, and place your right hand over the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top;  
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; 
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.  
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments, and for migraine, and for redness; 
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called “digger”, whose form is here: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and steady it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then tie the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it is saned and never work with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it does not suit that the flames are too large;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the saining is across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle. 
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Staining of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps with the eyes, and the nose, and the throat, and at the root of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the qualities of their staining are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some lien, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heal it, and let the healing be through a traverse, a prick of the long flame a little wide, for there is no flesh there. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks.  
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cloth, and tie it well. 
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The healing of the vein in the nose is good for a runny nose, and for sore throats, and for face ailments like migraine and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old. 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the qualities of the healing are that the patient tightens their collar, then strains their nose with their left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and inserts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in there, and the blood will now begin to correct.  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let them move too much, and make a correction of the blood according to your need, then tie it for one night, because it is very quickly restored; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And that is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The veins of the two shoulders help in the treatment of lameness, and in the beginning of rheumatism, and many illnesses, and epilepsy, and corrosions, and herpes, and tumors; 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the vein are that the patient strains their neck underneath both, as we have said; 
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on a stool, then prick the vein of the long one a little widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much as is needed; 
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do the other side in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and restrain both veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; 
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let him rest until morning so that the wound is healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the vein of the leaves
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and wounds of the gums and tongue.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the healing are to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said. 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins. 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore, cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and in the same way with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the cephalic bleeding, and it is at the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look below on each side a black vein:  
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then prick both, and do not go too deep in, for beneath them are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm which are commonly pricked are pricked according to two manners: 
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they prick at all the flame of the middle wide, or olive subtle as you cut trenches, and is called 'anesil'; 
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and thinness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame is very well known, and is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary for opening the veins with flowing blood that appear large and that contain thick and troubled blood; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive trench:  
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the veins subtly, where there is subtly yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen. 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is proper for the one who performs surgery that he operates skillfully, and that he avoids the artery which is below (it). 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; 
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be pricking the flame, but cutting as one would with a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want no vein of it, or you operate in its place the vein in the arm: 
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and with the flame cauterize, as we have said.  
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see to know the place of the wound, then it is fitting that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse. 
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with ink, and then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame as we have said. 
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery.  
eschui la donques.	Therefore avoid it. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it surge upward as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery. 
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and put your hand on its length, then remove your hand if the blood ceases, which happens many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	He raises his arm, and leaves it so, and does not move it the patient.  
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be without fear, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not clean and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then close the artery if it opens, because the head of the vein. 
et estainche li sans.	and cleanse the wound.  
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a rind of fig, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well until the next day. 
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the blade is unstained, this is good; 
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stain blood. 
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stains should not be grazed in more locations due to the small size of the wound and the position of the arm's ligament. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein's blood in the middle helps because it treats blood from above and below, due to its composition of basilary and cephalic veins as we have said; 
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is important for the patient to lie with their leg toward the nerve that is below, and if they are not too far apart, he finds the nerve and it swells and the healthy parts are grazed, and by chance it cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must feel for it with the instrument; 
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and escape the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes; 
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because this is the safest of all veins, because it has neither a nerve nor an artery.   
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not worry if one must do it the first time, and one begins again; 
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance it swells the eyes for some men, even if one does it the first time, but it does not harm them.  
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to maintain health, and to expel future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and may the bloodletting be done in one of the III veins which are or count: 
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	That is to say, cephalic, fasted, and basilica. 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must bleed at the beginning of prayers in the morning, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; 
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.  
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Blood letting administered to the sick has no set time, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Those over sixty years old should not bleed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some want to be bled, in whatever manner, it is fitting that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities from the intestines harmful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor does he heal well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as it lasts, nor the dropsy. 
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if it worsens after pain in the gut, vomiting and rumbling of the belly, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, of watching and fasting, and that which weakens virtue, whether by weapon or by body; 
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then purge the humors, if it is swollen, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power. 
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then bathe him, if nothing hinders, to purge the blood, and heal the vein around the third (of the body), as we have said.  
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep him from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things.   
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be healthy and joyful, and let the one who is healing be higher than the one who heals him, and rub his arm two or three times, then restrain the bandage on the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the swelling.   
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; 
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the veins with a drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein below its place one fingerbreadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst and be injured by the iron. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that bulge like cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the lancet on them, they retract from the lancet, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. 
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so that those who bleed should be wise in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it's good. 
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, if it begins again a little under that place or above gently, if the joints are not swollen 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the joints are swollen, and the patient is in distress, let him leave it for a day or two, and do not tie up his arm: 
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	for perhaps abscesses will come to appear.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into a bath, then resume the treatment if he wishes; 
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then pierce into that opening itself throughout its entire length straightly; 
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little gently, so that the joints become swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	because this happens many times when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, then do not resume the treatment, and put on a little bit of oil from olive, because it heals the body from blood, and is effective in this place, the grease that comes from the olive;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the linseed in each vein that you bleed them, to stop the flow of blood. 
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same thing is applied and bandaged when it is put back in place; 
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so subtly the bandage and spread when it is too large.  
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is only bled once and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some oil a little hot, and restrain it for an hour. 
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding of the vein, and if it remains in place for some days afterwards without any blackness or greenness, it does no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put on top nothing of aloe or frankincense remixed in the juice of calamine,  or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times abscesses and appearance to the basilica's healthy:  
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Place your hand then upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure of the hand, so is that appearance bad.  
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore eschew that you put upon it nothing of what we have said, because by chance it may close without the artery.  
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But let him cover with dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is black, let it be left so until it is red;  
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it large, let it be left until it becomes thinner. 
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.  
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for him who is lean and frail, and needs the extraction of blood, one should make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide; 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it befits him to bleed often, and he must be bled by cutting across, not by pricking. 
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bleeding is saved from the diminution of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is worth more than bleeding from the long or wide.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for him whose body needs bloodletting, it befits to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; 
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is hot, treat him with bloodletting three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, before the bloodletting, give him moistened bread in muzzy syrup, or in honey aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pulses at the vein, after the outflow of much blood, it is necessary that he moisten broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup, subtle, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to empty his arm, and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to drain his arm after the first vein opening, and he has strong flesh, then heals VII hours after the first vein opening, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another side, they must bleed the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has much blood within the body that is already hot, and brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it falls in pieces.  
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	since you treat all the conditions of its health, and put your hand on his pulse when it is healthy, that death may not come in place of pieces, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent. 
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not become when you see a dislocated arm, and make blood flow the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard on it.  
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	but if it is crooked, he should extend his arm as much as possible, because that would be bad; 
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it remain until it heals the second time.  
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, until the blood that was frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on the piece of felt laid in sharp, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity is to bleed a second time, then in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein of the arm is bled at the place of the vein of the head because it is composed there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healing is that the patient puts his hand into hot water until the bone is red. 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then the healing now through the middle, neither wide nor long. 
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the opening be wide, and be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot move out, put the hand back into hot water, and leave to draw the blood in the water until you have enough. 
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back into hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer. 
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it. 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it completely through, then it will not cause harm; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not move it too much, for the nerves are all uncovered from flesh, and then put the hand in warm water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot issue out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you will have treated of the blood as much as is necessary, then put on the vein oil and wool to soothe it well, and thus do for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of it in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the knees, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and legs ancients, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of its blood are such that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it perspires, and ties above the joint of the foot. 
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;  
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Blood therefore flows through the larger vein, or at the ankle, where it merits more. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you bleed on the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are beneath, and the bleeding should traverse as when cutting. 
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flames be applied.  
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the vein cannot be drawn out, then put your foot into the water, and let the vein flow well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the bleeding is necessary the first time, it is recommenced the second time above a bit, because the place is salty. 
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do of the same sort from the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic is at the ankle of fury, and its pain reaches to the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of his vein are that the patient enters into or bath, and withdraws above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise he does not open the vein. 
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, so draw the blood in all the ways that you can, and across. 
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better that you cut it, because the vein is dry, and it is much replenished in men's hands. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, so draw blood from any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And do so much blood drawing as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and restrain it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	She is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suctions are made of horns, or leather, or glass; 
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and suction is done in two ways: 
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.  
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction which is without pricking is done in two ways: 
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either with all fire, or without fire;  
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and suction that is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places on the body, so one is entirely at the top of the head; 
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck; 
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on the two ribs of the neck;  
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction under the chin; 
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction on both shoulders; 
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup on the hips 
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction cups remove them from the arms
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction cups from the two legs; 
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction cups from the two ankles;  
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction doesn't treat blood, but only small veins that are spread throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken one as much as bleeding from a vein; 
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not proper that it be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, as long as the whole body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to suction, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and remove and in every instance;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to suction, have a heavy head; 
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if to those who have swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;  
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed from it;  
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dream, and see through blood and dizziness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed from the month, we command to ventilate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The vein of the temple helps with the great pain in the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;  
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventosaion is in the place of the vein of the cephalic, and it is not proper for those who are of cold constitution to use it, or who have a catarrh, because this does great harm to them;  
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for those it is not proper that the elderly use it, nor who have or cold diseases of the head.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it, often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down because of the fear of obliviousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The cauterization of the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for that reason it is good for the treatment of the hip, and for cutting open the channel of the groin, and for all ailments, and for suppuration. 
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is proper not to put pressure too hard on it, because if it is held too firmly it can cause blockage in the stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The cauterization of the two ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia, and migraine, and to relieve strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica. 
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is proper that you command the person being treated to press their hand on the spot so they don't cut the artery and bleed excessively.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The cauterization below the chin is good for mouth ailments, and gum disease, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in the place of the II lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness coming from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The bleeding of the veins with the knife is as good as three arm veins because it draws blood from these large veins; 
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the patient not to bleed too much with it because the vein is bare of flesh and knows only nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The leech that is on the rump is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases underneath, and it must be that the leech is large, and be of iron, so that it has the need to well suck.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; 
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes large wounds.  
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The leeches on the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body, and are worth old pains of the reins, and of the bowels, and of the bladder, and soften tumors;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are located in the place of the two hip joints, and the two ankles, and nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about pain in many positions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and put it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the redness of blood. 
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then put it on fire, and replace the suction cups, and take heed to the arrangement of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores. 
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	so it is fitting to wound once only, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep hole.  
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the abscess is large, it is fitting to wound twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtly open the vein of blood thick 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike the third time;  
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to drain blood little by little, then we prick only once. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we begin again often; 
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the vein is thick, strike it deep, and the end is that the hairs be pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for him who has thick and hard skin, and who has open pores, that you apply to their place the leeches of oil aperitif and dissolving: 
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this case, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of the oil of cucurbit seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in winter, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of wormwood, or of balsam, or oil of rue, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being healed has tender skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he rises from it, or from myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities raise them with old wine, or with their own water, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things. 
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not suitable to draw blood with a cupping glass before bathing nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours. 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he get up when he needs to be cupped, and when he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware those who are being treated, who are choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and chicory and lettuce at the meal, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and minced pigeons, and goat meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and scented wine, which is between old and new, and millet, and pearl barley, and small sparrows, and pigeons. 
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day that he will become feverish, he must drink more than eat.  
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give no man at any time triacle or musket before the fever, or after, in order to comfort the main limbs; 
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And be subtle with the sweat, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are put without hurting are those that are put upon the liver and the stomach and gout, and upon the belly and the breast and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their own, and it is done only in order to draw blood from member to member, just as we put them on the nipples when milk comes in. 
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	In order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put cupping glasses on the belly and breast to reduce the size of the member.  
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and bone pain, when there is an ulcer or stone, so that by its virtue it attracts the ulcer, or displaces the stone from its place.  
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one puts it upon the liver and upon the stomach when there is wind held back, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; 
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water, such as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water where herbs suitable for it have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two palms wide and half a palm in length, and have a small hole on the side towards the middle, as if to insert a needle, and be of iron, so that it does not turn cold before putting it upon the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle place a rod of across from iron or rain, to put a candle in it gripped, and be they great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them. 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the leeches of children are other than the old, and the thin ones than the fat ones.  
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus one must put this leech upon the limb. 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Taking the candle of wax or linen, and putting it within the leech across from the rod which is within the leech, so that the light be at the bottom of the leech so it does not burn the patient; 
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then put it upon the limb, and these must be upon the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, so it goes the vapor, and one removes the leech; 
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take again the linen as before, and begin it often, if you have need.   
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in the illness of pleuresin, to all acute, it has no stalk nor perforation, and is not administered further than when it is full of water, and is placed upon the member only so much. 
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:  
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not administered further than in members where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones; 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in their wounds of flesh, such as two or nails, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the qualities of the user are that when you find suction cups that are in clear sweet waters without perforation, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them one by one in sweet water, until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their bellies; 
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then let it be cleansed by vein-letting and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on a poultice; 
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are smooth, and fall, if it is their place where one can put cupping, then put it, because it does much good after. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that is not the case, raise the place with a light hand, and then water, very well, and then sprain it. 
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the place heals too much after the poultice, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling subsides. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the swelling is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol or gall and similar things, until it subsides. 
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them stay there until they dry out on the place, then it will stop now. 
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more of them, take other bandages. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the bandages do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or you insert a needle there until the bandage comes out, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden. 
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are sticking, sprinkle a little bit of aloe and flaxseed powder on top, or ash, they will now stick. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear child, that the fools who rely on this chapter will never see any of the ancient books, nor read any letters from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is being lost in our land, because I never found any good ones
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing about it, except through the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It therefore behooves us to say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the sages place their understanding, and remain on the truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to cure the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; 
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tension is not very well, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid cold things, that is to say cold meats, and meat of deer and goat, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, as long as you have a doubt of hot abscess or expansion of matter in the limb; 
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to his first governance which he has used.  
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and entrails of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such twisting they are renewed and more quickly healed fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones broken of the old and decrepit do not well rejoin nor solder according to their nature for the dryness of the members, nor those also which are too tender, as bones of little children; 
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but never mind, instruct upon the broken bone, the big tendons which hold it together and join the limb together, as long as it enforces itself as it was before; 
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and for this reason, you must feed him with thick meats, as we have said.  
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to a point, and others when sharpening, like the nib of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture to a whole small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to every manner has his engine, and his instrument proper in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place. 
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the fracture of the bone by those that the place is twisted, and opens well outwardly, and  is felt at the pressure of the hand. 
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no torsion nor son at the touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture. 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit that you move it by hand, but put upon medicines which come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and the two parts are disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that an abscess may come at the wound;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if an abscess comes at the wound, then you leave it alone for no day, until the abscess is quieted. 
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it together carefully and skillfully as you can, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that one where there are pieces. 
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then restrain it, as it is fitting here afterward.   
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and they are two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or in your hand if it is one small limb, or two cords, or to one cord and to your hand; 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move them by all means to their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient. 
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.  
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well. 
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you straighten it well, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who cause it to come from their work abscess hot and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor by turning, nor in any other way.  
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take good care that the limb is so assured that it does not feel any pain.  
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in such a disposition that it does not feel any pain.  
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is placed straightly, that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.  
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in size and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: 
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to wrap bandages of soft and fine linen;  
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those which are large, such as hips and thighs: 
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, because the broad linens embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind it with light splints, III turns or IV according to the limb, and restrain your hand a bit on all the length, then go above the break and restrain it less, that the break then move away a bit. 
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the splint little by little, until you feel most of the healthy part, then take the other splint, and turn it back right above the broken place; 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go down to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above; 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the splints padding of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on a soothing poultice for the abscess, which takes away the swelling, and leave it so for some days. 
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain a piece of the  half of a good length of chain, or of a staff from which they make the cloaks, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure. 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the piece which one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and broader than the others;  
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it also be as long as is needed to the limb of small or large size; 
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then strain on the pieces as you did in the first binding, then bind above with a thread evenly, just as in the first binding above the fracture. 
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	more tight is it above, less; 
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen 
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their stitches with cords of twisted linen, and that is a great error, for the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not right that there be less than two fingers' width between each stitch. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the bones of the shoulders after the strapping in their healthy parts, then put under them compresses of linen or wool felt so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the bones are broken, I will say its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to tightly bind all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it is not right to put stitches further than after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of abscesses appearing hot.  
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: 
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, and you mix it with plenty of egg, and put this concoction, neither too light nor too thick, on top, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fracture in many cases, even for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of a plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take one part bardos bark and  celandine and wormwood and asafoetida and arabic gum and  mugwort, each ten parts; 
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, each five parts; 
alechil VIIII З.;	and alechyl nine parts.  
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is hot, so use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth to many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is worth for torsion:  
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and wormwood, each ten parts; 
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloes, each nine parts;  
acaice VI З.;	and acai six parts.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil Armenian X, grind it well, and confection with water or yolk of egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that arises, and the use of bone, and the fracture: 
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, and moisten it in broth and oil, and put it on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [the body], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly takes away the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to treat that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves, and earthworm leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of emplaster for the restoration of the broken bone and to lessen the remaining of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of chickpeas, one part each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and confection with wine, and if the limb is sun-scorched, confection it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to set a bone more firmly than the first, when an abscess prevents the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of flax,  balm, melilot, and saffron, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part. 
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should put on the broken limb a restorative made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of plaistering that is good for the wound and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take moth and chaffinch feathers or owl feathers, wormwood, and flax, all equally, grind them together, make a plaster and apply it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not loosen it by hand again for several days. 
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching,  lack of rest, or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster at once. 
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, and a sponge of wet sea, and dip it in water, and lift the spot up, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. 
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of hot suppuration. 
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And rest the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is gone, then begin again the subtle poultice, and a little bit of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue until it is healed.  
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess has pus and redness and pain and swelling are all there, and you need to apply poultice and linen, if it begins again, just as you did at the first doing.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unbind it for three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture sets, and approaches the alignment of the bone above; 
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before;  
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that numbness cannot come there; 
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply then a warm water bath, every time you loosen it, and that be each third day, and slightly remove the dressing; 
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work therefore comes numbness to the limb, and corrects hastily those who foolishly make it stiff again;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see no other thing than to leave it and work it straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures are, and various figures, and the causes are destined. 
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone every bone up to the side which is below the bone, as it is made high or low; 
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And for this reason, this kind of fracture is called "haichure".  
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; 
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound of these two fractures great or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impacted percussion, or fissure or of neck of stone, or of heel upon stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a fracture piercing, which approaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is rejoined in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary"; 
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound that is made either by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone inwards, and is the  place like those who make the braziers when they heat on the cauldrons; 
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the stones within 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have or whose head is moist bones, like that of a child;  
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated from them like stars; 
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.  
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by pulling on them, and the questioning with probes, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair capillary is known by this that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed above it, the black fracture opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of a fracture, take care of accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and emission of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever with chills, and eyes red and bulging, and other similar things in more dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unavoidable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone does not rot, and the accident we have mentioned comes about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes as far as the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the fractured part thus: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you  press the head of the sick man down and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can, and if a discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then help them with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the pus sack is quieted, and be assured of blood clotting; 
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:  
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is that you cut at the narrow section in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he puts another piece larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and some of iron: 
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in work lightly, so that you do not  break the head. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is  hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with saws, not too deeply so that they do not go beyond the soft part of the bone, and it must have above the point a margin or circle that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have more than one, so that each comes in its place of the species of bone, so that you may have targets for all tests.  
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three kinds of targets: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities for perceiving around the broken bone are that you put one target on the bone, and turn at your two [joints] until you know that the bone is perceived. 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the other target elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do these more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pliers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and keep that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is stayed from the bone to all other instruments seeming to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more strong and more subtle than the other incisor. 
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly lift the bones with the instruments;  
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; 
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it works very well, and that is his word.  
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lenticular incision, for this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and let the part be acute in two costs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; 
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly strike the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is stuck to the bone, gently remove it, because one removes it well without pain, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to rere that asperity, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you must have various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If one shaves before with a large razor, and after with more subtle ones, and does not cease doing so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breakage, it is fitting that you bring a cause according to its arrangement; 
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this thing is not returned to anyone who has put his study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the flesh, then administer above the other linen, and do not restrain it more than so that it holds the wound only;  
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of verveine, and powder of incense, and arnica, and similar things; 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer additional medicines mixed with no stinging.  
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to gather pus, because when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and pains, and brings great evils to the patient; 
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on a biting thing such as this, it stings upward  
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if no evil accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the blackness does not come out except through the medicine that has been put on, because it has virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with it, and put it on the sting.  
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it in ways of treatment as is fitting until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the kneecap break above or one only, because there are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break except if it is bent or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or the opening of the kneecap, and place each fracture inside your index finger and to the pouch on the outside, until the kneecap returns according to its natural shape. 
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the cheekbone and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even with the head of a stick a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, do it again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can. 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess is calmed, then bind to the head with two tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind it on the other side, if the fracture is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of both.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said any restorative one must moisten the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of auburn of an egg and powder of mill. 
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one puts or lays down goose feathers in place of tents, and if it's soft cloth draping around, and it holds the burn, and blows on the patient. 
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do what you wish.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the new while you work on it, put a cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the pock of diaquillon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess comes, put a plaster on the outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put light compresses on top, and bind it not at all.  
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then you extract it with suitable instruments for that, then suture the opening, and treat it with appropriate things like flesh, and soldering, as well as plasters and ointments suitable for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has no wound inside the bone, treat it with tents and put splints in them until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated down, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two, except that it is splintered inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient. 
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, put your right index finger there, and gently push the fracture inward, and with the other hand hold it from outside, and make it even. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced into two, it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth or a rupture occurs, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and then put a certificate on top of the broken jawbone, and put on a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on top of the cloth a large bandage well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it above as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. 
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And put a plaster on it, of powdered mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the pus. 
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put a light linen plaster on top, and if the plasters are dry and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy. 
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times is healed in three weeks.   
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together,  reward oneself, no piece of bone is removed. 
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety you have instruments suitable for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on its top bandages suitable to those, so that it may hinder flesh, until it be healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The collarbone breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or she is broken and severed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.  
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is so when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the helper who feels the fractured force. 
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part. 
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the fracture equal to your two, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor defect. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, so place under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your need. 
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and lightly the force, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you place the fracture equal, as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the bone out by force because it comes embedded, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back and put below the shoulder the lower edge of the arm, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it fragmented, it is necessary that you cut above; 
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any raising, then cut with one of the incisors that you have;  
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you place under the forceps this instrument, to guard the eye. 
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, and is not too pointed, and be also as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; 
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two cheeks, as you see, and be one wide, and the other narrower, as it is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; 
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of the hot abscess, so cover the wound, and if the break is small, or you doubt about hot abscess, then apply to the wound of cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come there, moisten the cloth in rose oil and asel and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of albumen of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the saddle, if you need it; 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put it draped double over the poultices, and bandage them. 
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a strip subtle of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. 
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the strip over the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder. 
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and bandage each part, and when you see that the strip holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the arm. 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If you want to lighten the fracture of the shoulder by setting the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, up to 20 days;  
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then re-apply the splint, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him like this, until he is restored. 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored in the most at 28 days, and in less to no one.   
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens that the shoulder breaks or its bone does not meet in the middle, and one cannot feel it except by touch. 
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	So arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on its place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light dressings, and put on top a double cloth. 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on top a broad and subtle strap, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the strap's edge is uneven anywhere on the shoulder, apply those bandages of linen so that the strap lies evenly.  
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then restrain it with a whole great bandage firmly, so that the strap does not move from its place, and look at the linen each day. 
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it softens, restrain it, and put the strap evenly if it is out of place, and make the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five. 
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is accomplished, untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that is put out lightly. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is exposed before and not under the heart, do it like this, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; 
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end.  
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the midst, it falls downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and cough, and perhaps vomiting blood, and opens the channels in the broken bone, and it feels warm to the touch.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of each rib with your hands, and carefully bring them together in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put plasters and bandages on top of the broken bone, a subtle salt poultice or some other light substance, and wrap it in cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; 
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it well, and reward every hour the linen, and if it becomes loose, tighten it. 
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it behooves to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and scrape the area, and dress those who have come from ways of care.  
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the area, and restrain it as long as it is healed. 
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in those places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only for those because they are brittle.  
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one feels it well upon inquiry as two. 
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put the fracture even, as it behoves.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on the splint, and restrain it with a strap if you need it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels great pain and sharpness, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and along with pains, and coughs and vomits great spitting of blood, and this is of grievous health, and the ancients have put much remedy in it.  
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to drive the wind outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, except that boils come when they haven't.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes to him, heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said any one of you put cupping glasses on the place, to suck them strongly, and it seems right.  
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.  
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said of each one that one should cover the place with wool moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the heat around it, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone which pierces the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath a instrument to guard the liver. 
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must trench the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes, then put on a cloth moistened in rose oil, and put it on the place;  
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the place of those that it is necessary for an abscess, and lie still on their side where it should, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; 
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.  
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when being pulled and straightened, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care into it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take note whether the feet are softened, and if the limbs that were affected are now in hand, and on the back there is airiness and involuntary evacuation; 
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has laid it on its stomach, then there is involuntary evacuation.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is placed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal: 
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if you do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you warm it if there is an abscess hot, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased; 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.  
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover the wound. 
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and then treat it with ointment that helps to close the flesh, until it is healed.  
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called "the bone of the cow," put your fist of your left hand into it and place it even with the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it.   
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then restrain it, and if there are broken bones, do the same, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens sometimes that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it has happened, it should have been a little bit lessened at the top;  
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and make it long and sloping towards the outside, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and tingling, and swells that which is broken. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you stretch your hand above, as long as you are on the breakage; 
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which one is the breakage and the form of it;  
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the breakage is only at the top, put straight that breakage, as long as it is in natural form. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it bends inwards, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you would have put it straight, put above the plaster, then put above a splint of wood or of heartwood, and restrain the breakage, so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place the part under the ribs, until the limb is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is healed, and put on what we have said before. 
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and restrain it as necessary, if there is no bad accident; 
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the way.  
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a piece of smooth wood, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And bind the two parts with two bindings, and raise them upward, and place the patient on a seat;  
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then when the bone of his arm is broken above the armpit, and there is one curvature of stick, then he may lie on any heavy thing or let ministers stretch it down.  
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the splints to his fracture even with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his head, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the two ministers that one holds those who are above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below all the limb, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, restrain the limb below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one splint under the armpit and the other towards the side, below the fracture. 
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And also if the fracture is towards the side, then it is necessary to put one splint lightly, without effort, until the fracture is even on the level, and on the side. 
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then put the fracture even as it should be, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscess comes there, do not restrain it until VII days, and put on a half linen in oil and rose ointment, until the abscess comes to be appeased. 
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint on the break, then assemble the arm upon the assistant, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the sheet, and restrain upon the assistant, and upon the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if no thing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, then use splints, and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint I do of space, and be each splint so great that it passes the break III does of each part. 
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then restrain upon the bones, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the bruise, stronger and less in distancing.  
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the heat abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said. 
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the dressings cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none such accidents come, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands upon his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder one cushion of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night that the form of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the bonds;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the food that we have put forth, in such a way that the food be at first subtle; 
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it begins to recover, let it be thick.  
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days from all; 
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must untie [it] and administer bath and medicines of ointments for the place to be addressed.  
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and impeded, it remains to untie for 1 day or II months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fossil," because one is small, and that is the one following the pouch; 
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and that is the one below, towards the small toe.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance broken the large fossil only, or the small one, and by chance both together.  
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing. 
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grieved than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large bone, then it must be pulled harder; 
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it over the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient may not suffer any labor;  
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the ministers of his arm to the lower part towards his hand, or on the limb, and one other minister to the other above.  
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirror even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its place, and if any is detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do as we have said before on the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; 
si pren la cure.	Take care of it. 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses come out, then glue the covering of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; 
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the covering gently above, until the abscesses are calmed. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cerate, and put the plaster of ground flour with plenty of egg white, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the crushing be a little more outwards, and one piece wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that he must have VI arm or arms in more arrangements: 
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in II;  
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and restrain more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;  
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and be neither hard nor rough; 
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, with which it is restrained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.  
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water until the itching is appeased; 
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be left too tightly restrained.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the nurse can't come to the limb because it is too swollen, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like this for some days until the swelling subsides, and then constrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or when he is turning, then he places his hands on his neck, and let his neck be straight, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back. 
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this sprain is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the constitutions and complexities of the humors. 
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as well the palms many times have a few fractures, and there comes nothing but swelling many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed and be straight in front of him equally. 
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he puts his hand on the board extended, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and places them equal the eyes, until they are well joined.  
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And puts the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place. 
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be enveloped in a linen sheet. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the root near the belly of the plant, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken limb. 
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then fasten it with a long cloth, and let the poultice be as large as the hand of the limb, and bind it as is fitting. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you must place a splint on top and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and close the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the leg, if it is the tibia, set it straight as is fitting. 
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and bind it with the limb, and if you see that it is set a little crooked to raise the fracture, and do not move it. 
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in any of the other bones, such as the index finger or another, set it straight and tie it with the healthy limb that is next to it. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all together while he is laying down, or put it on a splint like our pouch 
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot, dry abscess, and treat those who come to it, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often broken, and one can see this well when it turns front and back; 
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and its restoration is done by tying the part above the break, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his band to his side evenly; 
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the break is set in the bone.  
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one ligament should be pulled towards the groin and the other ligaments below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, then let the bands be near the knee, and the extension below; 
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then put the eyes of the bone even with his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and tie it, if abscess does not come there. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess hot, let it heal then return to your work and your cure; 
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The ligature is made in this manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you envelop on the bruise a doubled bandage hard in two or three, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread upwards; 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn upwards on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the bruise splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; 
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then apply the place eight between the leg and the hip of drapes soft to put even the tightness, then commence to tie strongly three or four above the fracture; 
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when more goes up above the fracture, and less the restraint;  
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then understand as two joints of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and in tie three knots that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; 
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and the restraint, so that it does not move from its place, then let him thus, then since there comes no abscess nor swelling nor other semblance.  
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, then untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; 
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of the bone that prick, then it is necessary to cover them, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place and draw out pus. 
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.  
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh bone is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm; 
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, with this restoration made, it does not harm the patient.  
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the  hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer but a fracture, or opening, and it happens to all wounds, without wound, and everyone feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is this: set equal those things that are broken to their halves, as long as they can be assembled and moved together;  
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put the splint on it, and put a round plaster over it if you need it, and restrain it as is necessary, then follow all the precautions that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply to each accident what is fitting for it, until it is healed.  
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, because one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and there occurs all the fracture as it comes to the arm, and for that reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all similar. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn it back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well;
et torne desoz.	and it turns downwards. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore administer extension, and put it straight, and tie the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nonetheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter. 
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the splint according to its virtue.  
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two fasces of felt that wrap the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to below.  
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap them in two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is well. 
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And none administer one bears along the length of the leg, and if it is felt, and it put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly made these in the fracture or where there is a wound. 
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it cures as long as it is sound.  
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot there is sometimes a fracture and at the two toes, and there have been very few in more dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their places;  
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the splint and pads above it, and place under the belly of the foot a small board at the shoulder plain, then restrain it to the foot evenly, then that you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when III days or IIII will have passed, untie the linen, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand.  
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be a little wider, then put under the foot that board that I have said, and restrain it evenly. 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and restrain the board under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be standing on the top of the board above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well. 
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said.  
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And take care of each accident as it is necessary. 
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's body is broken, make it sit wide open, then incline it to the back part, and be held behind. 
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the hollow of the patient's body with cotton, and put in as much as there is space for it.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then untie the woman, and raise her back up and down, and then push the cotton inward until it reaches the entrance of the body, and return the bone with it.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. 
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie to the wound a chain, and put all the bladder into the nature.  
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the chain's opening, until the bladder is inflated inside: 
la nature si revenra li brisure;	Then nature will return the fracture; 
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for several days until it is healed.  
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand of a man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the hipbone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these fractures near are not concealed from him who puts his study and use to it, and understands my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies in many positions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand then.   
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the shaft. 
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now, so that the dressings that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing, then keep the vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come there, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then you must put it back together lightly with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not ready for you to put it straight with your hands, then reset it using this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight finger lengths long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; 
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this purpose the one who works it must dip it in three or four, according to what he needs in each case of a broken bone.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and it should be wide in front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the shoulder head be placed on top of the apparent bone; 
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and push it once, until it returns, and be equal one against the other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it behoves that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then with the edge of a suitable instrument, either an incision tool or saw, to your power; 
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what is remaining in the bone of asperity and small splinters. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do so until it is in its place, then soak the bandage in dark, astringent wine, and properly this is what happens. 
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound, neither cork nor anything else that has oil, lest it cause rot and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture. 
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times this has been done foolishly, and it has brought about death or corrosion on the patient many times;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the strapping be softer and less forceful than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may happen there, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, then it is not advisable to put stars on it. 
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But enclose around it, in lieu of stars, hard cloths, and tie them.  
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the wound is starting to bulge, then remove what you have put on top of all wine, and put ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment tetra-formation and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, the morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bow be corrected down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for many days it does not heal and cannot return to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you must cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other manner of corruption, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but let it remain until it rots. 
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can;  
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it alone. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of boils which come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps cannot make the limbs their natural workings.  
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take heed then if it is fresh: 
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If it is fresh, administer topical medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, a spice, and similar others, in the way you will apply any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with an egg white, or with ash;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And place it on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not unwrap it by hand during the day; 
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then remove it, and begin another one, as long as the swellings are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you restrain upon a well-made piece of cloth;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the properties of linen is that it removes all swellings from limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the knot is already converted into hardness as a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity appear. 
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And you let her rest on no razor until she is removed, and the care as long as she is healed.  
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: 
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should be;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bandages, and it cannot come to the nourishment of the limb; 
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for a multitude of dressings;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too much movement, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the care is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, as long as the blood is multiplied in him. 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And administer baths to him, and give him joy and mirth.  
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and rose water often of tepid water, as long as the swelling corrects to the limb. 
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And returns to its natural shape.  
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of member wrong after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the bones broken apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: 
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	so do not believe fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and brings great harm, and by chance death. 
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the nodules and pain are fresh, it is necessary that they be soaked in hot water, or herbs softening are cooked, such as leaves of wormwood, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; 
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And you apply a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and you take the poultice of wormwood, and cook it with lard or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top. 
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take fat figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes is dislocation removed by continuously rubbing and lengthwise with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be exercised movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tumor is old and hardened, like stone, and the need is to remove it with iron, then it must be covered until the bone, with a sharp scalpel lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put cushions and padding in the treatment. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, because of which it cannot move, and the limb is poorly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary now to bring it back without resorting to splints.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and perhaps if one puts it back in place with pain. 
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	For this reason it is not proper to move it while it is inflamed. 
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times brings on pain and other aches;  
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nevertheless, when this happens, if it is healthy for the patient, then let him remain, until the abscess is calmed. 
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as it comes back to its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that the jawbones are dislocated, and these dislocations of both sides are according to two ways.  
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Or they are a little out of their places, and softened a little; 
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are entirely dislocated and hang towards the chin, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech.   
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more disarrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it gently, and do not complain. 
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and put their fist into the root of the jawbone dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; 
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other hand should be outside, to make it even.  
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften his jawbones, and move them in all directions.   
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the broken bone is placed even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is brought back with grief, even if the two jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset. 
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not complain about bringing it back, as we have said.  
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is tightly closed without softening, put on moistened cloths in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft bandages. 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions so that he does not move them to either side or strain himself in any way, but eat light food until the pains are gone and the jaws are joined. 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then chew what he wants lightly, and do not try to open the mouth while eating and drinking until the jaw is well joined and healed. 
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a perdition. 
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times he who has it dies, in nine days.  
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The harness cannot dislocate from within the side and hip, and it is dislocated no times outward, and it is well felt when it is.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies quite on his back, and extends his arms; 
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then presses the place with the palm of your hand, and it will return.  
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it; 
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate.   
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it dislocates any time, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest as long as he is sound.  
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in the same way is brought back the head of the scapula when it is dislocated from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways. 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	That one is when it dislocates to the side of the axilla.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second is toward the breast. 
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance it dislocates upward, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And it does not dislocate backward for the shoulder, nor inward towards the nerves. 
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And many times it dislocates toward the axilla, even in those who have little flesh, for at these the bone is easily moved. 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	In those with enough flesh, it moves hardly, and returns hardly. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must carefully examine it until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and therefore begins the cure. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known dislocation when it is moved down towards the hip, and make a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity. 
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if they were one piece.  
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its nest, nor move from any movement. 
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching. 
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their fists below the hip, and lift the joint forcefully upward to its place. 
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it up, then put it below;  
si venra hastanment.	if it comes hastily. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in hands just after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water;  
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister put on soothing and softening ointment, such as a decoction of elder and fennel and marshmallow in water, and it be applied; 
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient be laid on his back, and under the  seat a piece of felt even, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the patient on the stool, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the hand of the patient; 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down.  
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder returns all now, and if you see so reset it according to this manner: 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and is that you make be present a man who is greater than the patient;  
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and is right toward the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up so that the patient hangs in the air; 
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down toward the belly.  
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can carry with him anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And reset it also in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and is on place a long stick in the earth, whose head is as high as the bed, and is not too big nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then is placed under the patient, but that it has drapes above, and the patient is standing on the length of the staff;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend his hand down on one side, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly. 
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: 
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a splint of the arm of great size and four fingers wide, which has the head round so that it may enter through the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie above the head of the splint with strips so that the splint does not press on the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; 
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And extend his arm above the splint's long, and tie the shoulder to the splint, and the arm at the hand's head, then put the arm on the step of a wide plank, and let the hands down and let the body hang down on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns now.  
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that you put under the collar of a sphere of wool equal, then put the plaster parilliet of powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the collar evenly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal faster. 
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after seven days or seven, and move it.  
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is stiffened and it is not softened, then it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery to three holes, as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.  
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is toward the buttock, and the breast, or back, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there it is administered in another place.  
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care until it is healed. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing pain comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then the patient uses many baths until that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the arm
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated in places, and in places returns; 
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it has been dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because one sees it well and feels it well; 
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each shape. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it thus as the abscess comes in, because if the abscess came in, it would be grievous to reset it; 
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reset completely at all, even when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	so it is worse than the other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it comes to death. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is like that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; 
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms should be spread out, and the hands should touch each other according to the edge of the knife, above and below, and push the joint into its chest along with, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is to the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm at the root of the palm its side which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension.  
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension; 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the two hands join the joint to its hand, then anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then push the joint forcefully until it returns. 
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with the yolk of an egg on top, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the collar of the patient, and leave it for several days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligament, and let it.  
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not setting well, start again with the bandaging and the ligament, and leave it so for some days, until it is firmly set.  
puis le deslie.	then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put a piece of fat wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and wash it.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then wash it. 
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus do it two or three times, until it is healed.  
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, so put on a fleece of moist moss heated with butter, and strain it upon. 
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it will return to its place.  
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is lighter than other joints. 
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately when it dislocates, so that the joint is not swollen, or an abscess comes to the boil hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is that you put the ailing hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, in such a way that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns. 
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Therefore, place the patient's back of their hand upon a table at extension and retraction. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back of their hand on the table, and the one caring for them puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is well.  
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then let the patient be bound with soothing ointments to appease the abscess, and leave it so without starting again. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint remains twisted. 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does no harm to the patient except that as long as the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then you know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery.  
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other remedy but to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is not worth anything else. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and let it be for 5 days, then untie it and leave as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then the hot water cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are the two parts of the hand dislocated on either side, never to the back of the palm or the belly;  
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore is the duty, and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and the bring toward the part where it is disjoined.  
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	And let him rest for a day, and then put it even that day; 
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it each day, and make it move, and bind it again;  
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often, until it is straight, and just as well, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is sound;   
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And just as well, when it is dislocated from another place. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the dislocations jump out without will, and cannot be held, and many times are softened any limb, or both thighs or the two arms or one.  
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the bone moves to four parts.  
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That one which moves at the back is called "gilbositez": 
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure for this is that you reward it if the gilbositez came from childhood:  
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, which has not in all great profit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbositez that comes to the shoulder before, there is nothing nor health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come directly in II ribs, and one cannot cure them except for the one properly that comes to the back, as I say. 
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the patient be stretched on his face in the same place even, and have a constraint under him, that he does not bleed. 
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put the splint at the head in the earth, and the other at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and knees, and ankles. 
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two splints;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well fastened, the splints as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine straight, until it comes back. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not come back by this cure, then take a board of III arms long, and put it under the patient, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board on the spine; 
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place. 
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it to the turning wheel that turns by hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And is that you place two irons at the head of the sick person with one arm, and towards the feet the other, and between each iron, above and below, a palm's width of long. 
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each iron one hole, where the turning wheel goes, and that the irons be firmly in earth so that they do not move. 
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two irons have one turning iron, on which the chain turns, and have in the two turning ones two small irons a palm long, to turn the wheel. 
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the chain which is among the axles to one wheel towards the head, and the other chain towards the feet to the other wheel, and each of the assistants turns his wheel with all the chain, and the master puts the spine even as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, put a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the dressings, and then the splint of a tablet of III fingers long, that pricks the place of the vertebra and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until it is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if anything comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; 
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; 
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, for which reason one should not have presumption there. 
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance might come death.  
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and not like other joints.  
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in accordance with four parts: 
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Inside and outside, and front and back; 
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.  
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee at all.  
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the leg which is near swollen with a hot abscess, because of that the head of the pelvis comes forward. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to the fever, so is this accident contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who has it in front, are that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; 
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes over his heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens in the rear, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The return of this kind of dislocation is that you look at whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, if there is no treatment. 
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And there is no need for him to be presumptuous.  
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and this is of the IV manners of dislocation, haste that you return the joint, and the extension inward and outward, and the movement to the right and left; 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	For by chance it will return, and has no need of other treatment.  
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong force, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or to the ligament that is tied above the knee.  
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he thrusts his hands below his shoulders, then he tightens with a strong pull upon the hip.   
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another one seizes the chief of the ligament; 
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remain hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to IV likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, it is necessary to put care to its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is at the armpit, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy ribs, then put the ligament on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the ligament upwards towards the arm, and toward the shoulder. 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards.  
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	then it will return to its place now; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong band above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other. 
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then hang it from the top of a pole, and let it be two arms long above the ground;  
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers stand with the patient, who together embrace the hips, because the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the back, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and restrain the band on the affected leg properly, and on the foot as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two splints, one at the head and one at the feet, then place a splint between the hips of the patient to maintain shape. 
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have a plant of wet cloths around him so that the patient does not shiver, then extend each minister toward him, and the one who is watching puts it in place with his hand.  
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not so, place on a [table], and press it as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is visible, then it is necessary to extend the affected leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the one who is watching his pain on top of the affected bone, then press with the other hand and move it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, nor to raise upwards on the ground, but rather that it be as if the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said about the support on the two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said above, and one must press on the joint to the table. 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even;  
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and put on the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; 
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and put the splint on;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, so strain, as before, and let it rest for three days; 
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards; 
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate again. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at their hip, and if it does not rest at their hip, know that it is dislocated. 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their hip, and put their foot on your feet; 
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two bones that form the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And some other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can move his leg to his hip lightly. 
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And put the plaster on top, and make him rest his leg to his hip, and let them stay together for strong III days or IV, then untie it. 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not let the patient work at all to go, until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes sprained, and sometimes dislocated completely, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of it is that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts before in the part where it was dislocated: 
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The returning of it is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when he is only feeling pain.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated altogether, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him one minister by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then treat the foot with your right hand, then with your left twice, then upward at the front, and gently push the foot upward. 
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;  
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that is good; 
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, begin the work again, for it will return;  
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return thus, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it, so that the patient does not move. 
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then hold the patient's thigh with one hand, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the stick, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; 
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the stick should be straight between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when we straighten him; 
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mirrors equal to the dislocation with your hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the bottom, and the dislocation will return easily. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is set right, apply the plaster and dressings on top, and strain it firmly, and tie the leg to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind so that the ligatures are not too tight.  
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligatures soften, then strain it again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come there, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them well without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any knot of the foot or leg, then you must make the patient sit on a hard surface or table entirely straight, and put your foot on what separates those joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns. 
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is even and there appears nothing, put under the sole of the foot a table at the shoulder, then strain it firmly, and let it remain for 3 days, then untie it.  
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it rest until it is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times happens that the patient dies:  
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use at the beginning of things soothing to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope there, then reset now the limb to its place, so that the abscess hot comes up in it.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the heated abscess, and treat the wound as it is fitting, with dried ointment;  
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if the dislocation comes with a fracture, and bones are broken, set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;  
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it harms you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your limbs and body.  
