O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is the science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of its forces but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I want to bring it back to life together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is lengthened.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their movement and of those that move and those that are still, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that with the name it is much, and with the work it is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm people; just as I have often seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their knowledge and experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a fool who pierced, that is, an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and pierced her arteries in the neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed it with part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for this treatment, and see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took care of one duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance forced the fracture onto the wound as stars by strong ligature, and did not let any ointment on the wound, and left it so; and he commanded him that he would not untie it; and remained so that the leg became completely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it it was in peace and he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member until the members were all lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see i. another mire who burst i. abscess inflamed and then by the evil of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touches it with iron if it is not in such place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say, work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that the foolish people may not speak ill of you. Take your arms in counsel and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearsome diseases of grief and healing; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Gaians says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolishly looked at." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to 3 chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and of the shapes of the instruments, and the ferments of the cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it befits me to say the quality of the aid and of the ailment of each complextion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and of the ailment is the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret responses; and of these speak the most sages, and agree with them; and I suffice myself little to their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally to every complexion where it has matter, for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some debated and said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the contrary: that cautery is not good for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by a hot illness by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry illness that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, let no one interfere besides he who has experienced it and knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time;  we have no more fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and harms no other member whatsoever.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and bring diseases of grief healing; and perhaps the patient takes fire for his height and for the goodness of his substance does not do so, if there is not superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I would rob you of the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauteries should be made, and when they are to be done.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms arising are lessened by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they can wait for a time when greater malice comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think as do the fools who stare; for the sickness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is more useful than medicine for the speed of its virtue, and for the power of its work and its mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a wondrous thing is that sickness comes at no time according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the sickness and its virtue; and they are gathered together in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauteries administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and the same pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears well that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burn from cautery does not make rot, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some men; and gold cautery works better than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And altogether when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and if it is too soon cooled; and if it is heated too much; so they do at the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery which we have made apparent in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head down to the feet, for that the way may be lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two done because of a sickness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and also for all sicknesses that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a laxative medicine, modifying the head iii. or iv., according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can suffer; and then make rear the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your feet; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand back and forth turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. a little; and if you don't see it, then begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take i. pinch of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and place on the place, and let him for iii days; after put upon cotton moistened in butter; and let stay until the burning is removed; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the ancients, that when more a wound stays open, more it purges; and for this reason they helped move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said some of these that one must leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then re-sew that which is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one should leave the cautery so, and push so strongly that it pushes down the bone as wide as a .i. whorl that women put in their spindles for that the humors may be moved out; and one should leave the wound open long; afterwards one should clean and bind.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these .ij. manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; for the head is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and better for me, and from this use I work then altogether healthy.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not good.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and that it not be too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery one prick as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one of them in which one puts suction cups; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicines cooling, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this profits not: then I do cautery according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine acrid and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of acrid medicine is that you take a piece of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers, and then make in the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can put back the piece of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed thus you tie it and restrain well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and take out the piece of garlic, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on top cotton dipped in butter until it covers it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that this is done with some burning medicines that I have written or in the following treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done this way. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as follows is the form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "clo" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has .i.  inch of curve, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and restrain the fire a little lightly, until the half of the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, that is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the place for .iij. days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at all the point, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not so ancient.
de emigraine	Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and then place it on the aching spot a line of half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; and guard yourself from the jaw moving when one brings it together, and the nerves do not see but that they are still and that spasms do not come to the patient, and guard yourself from bleeding of the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so for him who does not know about it, and who is not studying and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij.  blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then scavenge this cautery which is called "point", for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After point all around the ear of the sick, or to two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a little bit upwards from the root of the ear after that you have signaled the place to burn; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cautery is not for others than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of maladies; and do not make cautery to resemblances that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of eyes and expectorations of the head and gargarisms, and these are not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let the cautery be done to the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a point more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a point larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that warm the brain; after having raised the head of the patient, and placing on the back of the head a plaster of mustard as is written in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if I do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy like this, good is; and if it is not, then to him make three cauteries from the top of the head descending to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two fingers' breadth; and cure it as the others, and if you see it joining together, and the patient suffers, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be called «olivare», as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and of what we have said before; after having rinsed the head of the patient, then do cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the malady is severe, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most part of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and let the cautery be called «olivare» that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic patients should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from bad medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then make gargarismes and chewing that modify the brain often with good meats; after that, place the crown on their head in the middle, and there make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is ill and suffering, then do cauteries like I said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, then make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by reason of melancholy there are excesses or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then the cautery with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by reason of melancholy the excesses decline to melancholy, and the body of the sick man is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having anointed the head of the sick man; after making one tortel of linen well made, as well as one circle, place it in the middle of the head; and let the sick man sit crossed, and be held well on all sides; after applying the liniment, and melt wax of old sheep's butter; and heat it gently over the fire so that the patient may endure if it is burned; after emptying the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick man every week once with another good governance, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it burned with many pricks throughout the cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts on cotton moistened in butter and fat of lard. 
de l’awe des eulz	of the opening of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the opening of the eyes comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient something purifying the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to bring back his head, and make cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the opening is to the 2 eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut through all the cauteries veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against a decrease of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, so staunch it with as much power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or haterel under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Of the tears' courses
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the art descending to the eyes: 1 cautery in front of the temple, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or haterel under the 2 bones; and if it is needed more, then cauterize sagely above the eyebrow with all small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the tears' courses from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nuts of wine; after which bathe his head and apply the cautery or a medium olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called “clavilis” on the two shoulders, one below the cheeks; and guard yourself from the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called “clavilis”:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare".  
de coi ci est li forme:	of this is the form:  
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except while the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hairs that prick the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to .ij. manners: that is to say of fire, or of ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient on his back; after draw upon the paper of the eyes a figure that be as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and muslin of pellitory over the eye, then heat the cautery to this form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point and point many times, so that the hairs be burned at that place; and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after cure with ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are far away, so cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural place, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in .i. eye only, then must one work in .i., and if in both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the egg white; and let the head of the patient be in your lap and put your two hands on the medicine, and press .i. pock and the loaf every time that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for it feels the sting as of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this long time, then remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cautery will have passed, so lift the place of the skin, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.  
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not done, return the medicine to the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are in place; then put soft cotton on butter until the burns are dry, after cure the place of the ointment which is called “diafenis” and another, until it is healed.  
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle. 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on your lap; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he lower his head; after putting moistened cotton in vinegar or in parsley juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and is shaped like the quill of a goose feather, together with which the cautery should be; if you see fit, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see fit, as well as a tent; but nevertheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, operate on it, and treat outside the bow; after place the hot cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eyelid above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the grease of the eye, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not happen, start the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and leave it for III days; after that put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with the ointment until it is healed, and if XL days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine corrosive acid until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to a fistula, and make an opening; after putting in the slit a fine cloth of which here is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And it is made in the quantity of 3 of plumb; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted plumb does not run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in almond oil or in egg: the plumb will seal the place of the fistula, and the healing by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer pus to the wound, and bring the fistula back to the body of the wound according to where it should be in its own place. 
des crevaices en levres	Of crevices in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur crevices in the lips that are called "poils," and even on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply i. a small scalpel cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it carefully in those openings until it comes to the bottom; after care the place with cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and broken, and is ulcerated and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it behooves you to have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or pierce of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron comes to the bottom of it, and its last place; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it behooves you to discover the place and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that is not worthwhile, then put the head of the patient in your hand; after heats the cautery whose form will come later in this manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot gently, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour and spit out hard.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the tooth which was moving is so confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dries.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the remedies of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery in two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterizing of butter is such that you take butter of sheep's milk, and the end in a spoonful of iron or steel; after taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a skewer, and soaking it in hot melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it cools; and thus do often as many times as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so soaked wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one heated iron above it until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery in hot iron is such that you prick a piece of iron or steel, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after warming the cautery, because its form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed on the same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then drive it; and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery where you want, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the cauter.
des scrophules	of scrofulous sores
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron as comes after in the form, and let it have openings for the fumes to issue to the cautery on the other side; and put the hot cautery upon the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it remain thus for III days; and put upon cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place with ointment and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors overwhelm the channels of the throat and also when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicinal solutions; afterward make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come even to the throat, and burn only as much as the heart. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire I make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	of the wound
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and sickness of  the body are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the sickness is ancient, if one makes two cauteries on the forcele in their places; and one other cautery between the two nipples; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cautery by pricking at all the cautery which is called "points" of which the form is before in the sickness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or as much as they go into. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at III reins according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for that these are the lighter cauteries, for that you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, so support the patient on his back and on his ribs; afterward lift the heart which is within with the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has .ij. ners [?], for this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and should come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes is joined on this, i.e. nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery properly ground with wool; after make rest the patient, and let not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which rarely happens, then perform cautery on the thickened part of the clavicle with a large cautery or several. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.  
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it alters its complexion, and there is multiplication of phlegm in him, and the customary ways of cure do not benefit him, then it behoves the patient to be treated on his back, and stretch his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I make III cauteries 1 under the shoulder blade of the worse side by the quantity of one dice, to all the cautery clavicle, and II cauteries above the II ribs until the figure of the cauteries is in III angles, and there be a tail space between one and the other that they be not joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so well-done that they pierce the II parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and seizing on the stomach at point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point." 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healthy. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When to the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is been removed from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those that we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him if it is necessary that the patient be treated on his bed; and sign of enche III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs come from; and have spacing between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be long and in the middle of the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cautery; and let it burn only half of the heart, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then lying down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you desire it, then cauterize these cauteries with the curette, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all of the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and that it does not come to boiling, because the hearts is very delicate in this place, and you know how to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, it feels pain sharply. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is finished, it becomes necessary for the patient to be covered on his head; and then hold the place where the abscess is, and then warm the cautery that is similar to the ray, from which this is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery as long as the hairs are burned, and come to the scalp, as long as the skin is all healed; after the cure according to the cure of the wounds until it is healed; and it is not right that none but those who have studied long in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and whose hands these diseases have corrupted any time. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly work, and it seems to me all ways he is better off leaving them alone. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the largest that you will be able to find, and be it dry, and be it also as thick and as long as your thumbs; and the moisten in oil, and the press in the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two little cauteries a point going down in the part that is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a point; and one cautery in the middle of the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs under from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that any old man uses cautery of fire seeming to the razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and jumps out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed. 
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the ailment of mice as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one manner so is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, in lining according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to all the cautery, and let the patient be supine on his back; and another manner of cautery so is that you heat the cautery which has II ners, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is in the mice, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the breadth of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After it burns the two nerves inflamed until the kernels are pierced on the other side, and then withdraws the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, then cauterize the whole cautery to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has got rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before mentioned.  
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for hydropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it behooves you to make for him IIII cauteries around the abdomen, and I above the stomach, and one on the liver, and I on the spleen, and II behind the back on the spine, and I at the place of the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the flesh of the heart.  
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open for festering long time, and do not let the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is put forward.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of yellow fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter it too deep, so enclose the outer part of the fire-colored lime tightly, and let the cautery be according to this form. 
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make upon .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg to the point of the cuttlefish; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee forward and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries over long without curing, that they may enter into it; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that is in stomach and in intestine are bled, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, so make one great cautery upon the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the subtle bud all one cautery clavil subtil, and two cauteries on the loins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the dagger, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you do cauteries: III above the spine of the back, this which is all outside under almecate poc and poc in triangulating, and I cautery below the buttocks II does; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face you do I great cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice at all cautery clavile; and leave the cautery open long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cure the place until it be healthy. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the "thelul," sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that "thelul" cut; and leave it there as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of beneficial ointments as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then comes such a disease that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes a fistula, and is filled and rotten with corruption and dampness, then you must have a probe prepared at once, and guard that you know the probe how deep it goes.  
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and putting it in the fistula according to the quantity that the one who tends it is entered, and reheat the cautery until that flesh that is porous and corrupt be burned, once, or II or III, according to the quantity of its need; and take care not to touch the nerve that is in there, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those wounds except in their fleshy place, and think that she is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is healthy, and if the places are healed, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the place is completely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is sick, and corrupted the bone at the root; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great flatulence, and does not take (medicine) for woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery upon the kidneys on one part and on the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and soft from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs begin at the groin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a finger; and you make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously stated.
de la marris	of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow to come; and when they do come, there is great pain: therefore it behooves one to make three cauteries around the waist, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be shaped like a wedge, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors descend to the hip joint, and because of this they move out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the location is found in the region above the hip, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint at i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle; and let the cautery be like that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then make iij. cauteries of the olive-sized large ones, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to say together medicines burning, and cautery of fire. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the crest of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you want, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner how one does in sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and the cautery above the ankle four fingers’ width, on the left side a point; and whether the cautery is cuticular, or whether it is burnt with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery called “point.”  
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, one makes more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the cutting or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do not make more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have applied cautery on the ankle of the foot, and let them until the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly solution by which he died. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, for this is the manner, make such iron and be at the head also as large as a thimble of finger, or one jot less, and be between meshes and be from one mesh to the other of space the quantity of a knuckle of a hand; and let the meshes be on two parts, and let them be also like nuts, and let there be in the hip iron well made; and this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned onto the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery return and let it leave three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and it is seen little who uses it; and nonetheless those are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning are such that you make the instrument with interstices in which the edge descends into the margin of the door, and it be of iron or steel to a length, and in height it has two, and between each the quantity of the thickness of a penny; and let them be open outside and above, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the bolster of the hip upon the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand very upon the bolster of the hip; after throw between the II circles of the hot awl which be heated at the fire I poc, and let him one hour of the time, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found there is a remedy with fire, and when the cauterization has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave so for 3 days, and put butter on top until that which is black from the burn is removed; and let it stay for 3 days that rot may be drawn out; and this would be the last aid after the cure of the blemishes until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, do what you did in the hip augmentation; and that is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it or treated it in the treatise of rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole of fire, so that the point of a razor can enter it; and put one pot above the other well plugged, and put alkaline and salt and sweet wax on top, until there is the right amount of powder as you have well prepared with your hand; and let it remain like this until it descends sweet water and becomes soft or plugged, then take all that moisture, and place it on salt and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it will be much acute and is administered in many works of medicine and cauteries of other members Because it does the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well like honey and nutmeg and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galicians tell us a cure of which a man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatica vein, and he walked well, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards.  
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in such manner that you take a little of the green litharge dry and fresh, and grind it well with a bit of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and apply; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.   
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath until the body is slightly warmed, and you make him enter into his bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.  
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with iron from a sheep, it helps a great deal; and it must be done the cautery in such a manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it with old oil, and place it on the socket which is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called  fossile. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After take fine of sheep dry, and put him to fire until he be coals, and put him on the wool, and let him until it be stained; and do again thus, and cease not to do thus until you think by senses that it come unto the hip, and that the pain be ceased; and this manner of cautery is called «cautery of sheep». 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold matter spread, to none of these appearances is cautery suitable, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this, that the patient be free of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with enche, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see it, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the clavile cautery middle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a constricted belly when they cry, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you will cure it, cauterize it with the cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery sears each part of the spine evenly. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three, and be the points near one another.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care that you do not apply cautery in a swelling which is in a nerve's space.  
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints are from dampness which are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, that the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and cures by medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then make the cautery to the whole cautery one claims “point”. 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make a cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, to all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then make more, but don’t hold your hand too hard except as long as the tip of the heart is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the bone II lines; and if there remains no pain in the two sides, make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and ponder medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern him well and purge his phlegm, he shall be healed with the help of God. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in the groin, and the balls descend to the thighs, and it is new, then when you see it healed, that he does not move his leg that day; and that he uses things which make the belly softer, so that the bowels descend from his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the balls are repaired, and move them to your sides, and take a sign of a half-circle above the groin; then burn the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and he feels them.  
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return back; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other upon the hip which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight and straight as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, begin again once more until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other evil. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come right to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing.  
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be fine according to their measure, and those of large people also large according to their measure; after III days cure, smear with butter until the burn is removed; after the cure other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie for XL days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that their bandages be left long so that the boil does not come out when he tries to go into chambers. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, he is given a well-made splint, and wears it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and he keeps himself from too much drinking and eating, and from too high lifting; and when he does these instructions, he is completely healed.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of  tailor in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then to it I make the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it burnt to the third part of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that one should cauterize with the cautery at III angles according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the place of the bone and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand over the whole fire cautery clavil 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more agile. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, whether from a fall or from being hit, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not there, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cautery, it is well; if not, redo another cautery on top of that one, for it is customary that it must heal in the member that it is near, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and also the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it being cauterized, take care if the patient is at the beginning, and if she is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not send or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make V cautery on his head: I put the head towards nine, and the other toward the front at the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the haiterel; and let your hand so that the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the crusts come out so that the vapors of the large humors can go out; and cauterize it on the mice according to what it is before. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it manifests itself clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great one on the hip and .i. other near the groin, and .ij. on the .ij. shoulders; and .ij. on the ribs, and .ij. on the tendons of the thigh, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the lower heel, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done to cauterize on the bone of the arm, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And knows that when more fire is done, more it does help, and moves the profit; and knows that the sick one feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy ones feel it, for that reason because the body is already all corrupted.  
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After care the place with flour of dates with honey and other dressings until it is healed.  
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point penetrating into the thickness of the skin; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at times one makes cautery with the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus is removed the swelling; and nonetheless does not interfere anyone if he is not knowing of the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.  
de albaras	of almonds
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the malady that is called "albaras" is enfeebling, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the species of heart, until the white part is removed and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of beans and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from the alondre, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of syphilis by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the sore. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nonetheless the wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and nonetheless it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and more right thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circulus," as we have said in much of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to die or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the blood of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in pricking; after leave it thus. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.  
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it becoming worse with the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of the malady that is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from afar in such a manner that the course of the rot be cleansed.  
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is perfectly healthy.  
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness called "corroding," and it is nothing else than a consumption of a limb, because it wastes the limbs as if they were dry ropes.  
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this sickness in a place that can suffer fire cautery, then sharpen the cauteries small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the sickness is; after that cauterize all sides as much as you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for III days, and put on the cauterized places softened crushed with oil until the ashes of fire are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of blemishes producing flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after III days that the char is healthy and does not grow back, it is good; and if these are not, then begin the cautery again on those which remain corrupted from their place.  
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ailment has sometimes been cured with medicinal wine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of medicinal wine in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the roots that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from fire a sickness is born in the foot which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a great thing harmful which discolors the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness is according to 2 manners.  
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and cautery of hot water. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	A fire cautery is that you sharpen the cautery point like a vulture's feather, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can encompass the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after it put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for III days until it begins to get rot; then you make a plaster of wild mallow crushed with silk, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment, keeping the flesh clean until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire on the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them to the cautery of hot water; and it is in such manner: take a cane of brass or iron, or a pen of vulture, and put above the nail and the althelul, that is to say, small warts; and put the cane on so that it embraces all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep until the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water an hour; then leave him thus, and it will be rooted out all its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you search all those that are in the body, then treat the ailments which generate flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make to them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; so will he stop trembling, and hasten the health from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	of suppurating pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear by fires the body bathed, or pimples that come from large corrupted matters. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary in the first instance when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that its point be seized by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or on the lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterize one at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but are removed the superfluities from which they come, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or to the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very grievous thing to be prolonged.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger index upon the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the blood is appeased under your finger, and no more drops out; then put on fire the olive cauteries more small and great as many as they are red; then grasp i., or large or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery upon that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the bleeding is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily i. other of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make them one after the other until the vein is stretched; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when a vein runs out of the artery, it cannot be well stretched even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of a thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and let it be bound and constrained firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring the tightening of linen or straps tightly or putting burning things on, or similar things, if it does not benefit, no.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he must put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten the hand with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and stretched; and make those in advance which he needs for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of tail
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and their incisions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it more easily what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I begin this one, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason, greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to treatments. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have so been afflicted with their illness that they die easily because of the foolishness they find in their illness, and the greatness of their wickedness; and of these one should have fear.  
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are who give you their meaning, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is insidious. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not proper that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more care into your honor than your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have praise for; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that their health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you will aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter by chapters, according to that which it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head to the feet, for those that you find more easily those of which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the head of the child too hard; and some times it comes from a cause unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and to all those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until it could not be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide opening; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you cut in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract the moisture all out. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After having strained the incisions of cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and let it so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the chief bandage be strapped tight, and then give the patient dry meat without moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of water, and open it according to what you have power; and beware that you do not sever the artery; and vein flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to any one a malady that is called «catarre» in the eyes or at the breast, and the illness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery with those one covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It therefore behooves you, when you see them cover, that the patient put back his head; after which rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck with all the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and now they are returned; then sign the veins of each, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from part II, as far as the bone comes, and so it should be by the wide mouth of the head.  
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, plunge the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood jumps out from above continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open by feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of III fingers, then hold with your finger and make until the bone; and that which is necessary to put out the blood is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point without syphac, then he cuts it so that pus does not come, then hold the wound tight and tie it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.  
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, for the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient foreskin and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit it, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient make rear the hairs of his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it is strained its neck the patient from some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and rose the place of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then skin the leather lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it at the top of the pincers, and then depart well from the webs that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the probe, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not jump the sinew at all
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from .vj.  c/ to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in .ij. lengths with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the sewing of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cupped cautery up to the bone until the fingerbreadths are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater help against the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put tents well made on top; and when they are untied, be careful to use dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and tents, until it is healed; and if without a piece of the artery as much as you work on it, then hurry to cover it with cautery, or you put the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the blood stops; and if you don't have those present, put on the place your thumb until the bleeding ceases, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as is necessary; and what is most effective and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant of .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to hold their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thick, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives one that is a good thickness, and then when you have signed in the two sides, and you put the red hot iron over until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two fingers; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not joined of this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head of fur, and it does not profit any cure of medicine is done, and you see the face of the patient encircle, and feels on the forehead walk like of a trembling; and where oil are wet and moist so that the hair of the papers are falling, and are dried out the papers, and scorched by the ardor of the tears, so it needs this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this malady the hairs that he have on his forehead, then you make III incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions as II should all remove the forehead down to the bone, and the others II as II ribs above the cheekbones; and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are at the II ribs above the cheekbones; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of III fingers across; and have a piece of sponge and much of clothses for to wipe the blood, then put the sharp spatula of II parts of which this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the marrow that is between the .ii. cuts at all the fascia that is above the bone, then make another from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract further this spatula
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting toward the air side to the heart, and the rib bottom towards the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle crack. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as the eyes so long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the one who opens the heart, and then another part made in the middle fissure until the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on drapes moistened in wine and oil and basil, and keep that pus does not come; and on the third day untie the thread, and there administer great plant of water tead, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures which one cures wounds, as long as it is healed.  
dou reume des eulz	of the eye's
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to any come a sharp catarrh, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in them make an acute pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come but from many veins, and the moisture cure that is there, so is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to lay back their head, then make a deep cut in the middle of the forehead, and another along the brow. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begins from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in eating; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then tie above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, that they make cartilage.  
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to cause char to grow throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, as beans, lentils, peas; or flowing thing as water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, stone or another thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear to the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if there distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and let him sneeze with condiment, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and elevate the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times comes pus by this cure; and if it does not come pus, administer the extraction with subtle pincers, for that is the form. 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps forth with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine instrument of small doubleure; and if it does not jump forth by this, make a chain of iron and put the head of the chain or through the opening of the ear forcefully, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then pull forth forcefully, for often it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, take a gut which they use to catch birds, and put into some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; then press the gut on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not follow all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear so as an abscess comes out, and spasms; and the manner of cutting it is that you first make the patient healthy in the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and making a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it gently with your mouth; and the care until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer i. spatula tenve subtle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grain is wet because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine pincers and a suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.  
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water therefore that falls into the ear it is necessary for the patient to use an externment of first conditions and to open the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear where the water is.  
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it leaps forward by itself, it is good. 
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this is not done, then many stones are taken according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and they are heated a little in the fire; and you put it on the sick person at one opening of his ear, and pull up from there with his feet, and pierce another stone through the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this of stone into stone until the water comes out completely, and so it will all come out completely; and if you see it, then take a reed, and put one end into the ear, and the other end hold on fire until the reed burns down as much as possible; then make another part with other reeds until the water comes out completely, as we have said in the stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied that one can feel it, administer an extraction with tweezers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, then treat them with fine tweezers, and if they don't appear, take the dog of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed form at all the chain; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to be set straight, so stop them with cotton wool as I have said in the ear; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the excision of worms, and you will find them treating with distillations; and if distill your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or of iron, narrow below with i. small holes, and wide above to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation i. instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take i. razor and wrap around the tip conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caine, and let the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be i. pock heated at the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the clogging of a wound, or flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes from within the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes there are i.e., a poke of pus, and it can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of great harm in many dispositions, and in this case you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all these spatumiles of which this is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the opening is of flesh growing or a piece of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if an opening is made into the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.  
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the breadth of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this with no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the sheet of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althule that comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, it behooves you to extend them with pliers and tweezers, and the edge of a spatula from their roots; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without it decorates, then cauterize with a fine lentil cautery, and the cauterization after the incision is worth moves; and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers come from the eyes things that seem grainy in its form and in its hardness, and for this reason this sickness is called “hail,” and is a gathering of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the work is such: take ward if the hail moves from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know; then make the broad, then the skin each part lightly, then take it with the tweezers, and the chop. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without feeling a bit of the paper, do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the healing will restore it quickly and prevent scar. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending down into the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper, and being the hail to pliers, and cut it and press from one side and another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hail is cut, so leave the eye of salted water, and cure the place with that which prevents flesh until the sick be healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	This is a type of grease that is generated in the tissues under the skin, and this happens more to children than adults, and grieves their eyes, and they come down with cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces afterwards, and sleep on their backs, and are their tissues under their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and the appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the grating between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your shoulder; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then put it on top of him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a fissure of a width, and not be more than the wound made in the vein; and make the skin in length as far as you come to the exirnach; and in more places comes exirnach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then a whole piece of cloth with your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, that you come to the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the fissure, so accroi a little the fissure lightly until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in aisil and in water, and put on top, and strain with bands.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind grain and put it above to corrupt the moisture which is lingering. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure as long as it is healthy. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to a hot place, so treat it with soothing ointments until it is healed. 
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs grow arranged other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes and bring many kinds of maladies as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as that is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to this that it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is made or by incision and stitch or by caines, according to that which I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It behooves you to put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if this is not so, there puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and let it be below the margin of the paper or where the hair grows next to these hairs, and trace .i. thread upward to the entire paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs arranged, to all the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then reign above the paper a figure of an enche, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it behooves that the figure is according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs it, cut a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper is soft; then make at all the spatula on the II lines that you have signed, and commence from the top great tear down to small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the incision in one of the two angles of the ear, then peel it completely; then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle at all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at all none gluing things, if you want to do this; and if not, take no care, then leave the suture and the threads until III days or IIII; then cure the wound without suture with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is changed (as the ancients said), and this work without fear; and if in another manner: and that you sign the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at III incisions separate according to the form that is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which rises above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle that has thread, and put it into the figure; and put the other thread next to the big tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointment soothing; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said of the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the splints is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to those that I have said, and then make .ij. splints by art, and .ij. subtle ligaments as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly on top of that which overhangs the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. splints of the .ij. parts form; and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and wrinkle and carry itself, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if he has strength with the blow, then cure him until he is sound; and when the wound is healed, and the paper is removed, and they will not prick any longer the hairs; and this is the form of the two cauteries that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide. 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works is such that you prick a subtle needle, and put in it one thread of silk, soft and subtle; then assemble the heads and knot them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk, finely braided, and knot the chief of the threads; then put the patient’s head on your healthy one; and let it be in the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle all the way into the chase in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce in the paper carefully until you draw it from above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out all the way into the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the opening above and you see it with the vision of your eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hair is small, accompany it with one long hair from the natural ones, and let it be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or rot comes in the eye, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by force of a wound, or incision or cautery, and by similar things.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and tie it until it is healed; and it does not behoove you to use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than at first; but there is work of softening things, such as fennel; and the rosehip of water or high and flax seed are cooked, and a dyacylum ointment melted in any oil, and wrap a tent, and treat it. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not suture according to the form that it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but remedies for this sickness, that it may not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness which is dislocation truly is called “axacrati”, and is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you prick an awl, in which it has the double thread, and you put it into the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left to the right, so that the thread goes into the two shoulders of the flesh; then is the flesh above all the awl, and the cut at the spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should, it is good; if those are not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make II splits where the cost is inside the paper; and let the heads of the II slits be at the II angles of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has the name 'I griesche'; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is added down, from those who follow the paper, then adjust the II parts apart, and the seams with a thread of wool; then care for those that we have said about mollifying medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.  
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the ailment comes from a split or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you split a plain cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything with all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and instruments in more dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper's
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering happens to a man's eye in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural workings, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the being as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula fine, which must not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp or bleaches the eye; and let your incision, with which you remove this assembly, be gentle, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and it is healed all of this assembly, and one does no time in the eye salty water, and the leavings of fresh water, and of coliere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in the white of an egg; and after the third day use the coliere and the things soudans until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in two ways: it is nervouse and similar to one hard syfac, and another which is not nervouse, but is similar to white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one boils it panre as pinches, so one cannot; and the one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pinches of small doubleure, and the rest upwards; then take a needle, and put on it one hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a poc and put it in the angle, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the rest upwards, and scar the whole hair along the side of the angle which follows the prunele and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the spatumile subtle and small forces, and leave the char natureil or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears acostumeement; and no times is it ascended the angle only, and on the thread, as we have said; then the scar on all the spatumile souef of this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of silk ground, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as much as it needs until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle in, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red ochre and ground silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the eye, like an abscess, then milk it, and treat the abscess first as hot as long as it is healed, then restart the work as before, as long as it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear hurts in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the armpit and cut a part and not half altogether, so that no body of tears comes; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red color, and covers the white and restrained on the eyelids and turns to the fire, and seems like a rose of battle; and the work is that the sick man puts his head in your healthy, then he works the eyes, and coil all that flesh with needles suitable to those, and the sustain at the force; then chops the first flesh, and goes to all chopping to the razor until the end, and keep that you do not bruise the eye during the work; and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and as small forces by which one takes away the sebum, as the form after this chapter demonstrates it; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silkworm or you distill red coral and similar medicines corrosive, and put on top of the eye fire cotton with egg white, so that it may be assured of hot pus; and if there remains nothing, and the without the wound covers it, and you doubt hot pus, so leave the eye and treat the abscess with things soothing hot pus; then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until all flesh is adjusted in the eye by this semblance.  
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil by nature's way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member be suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Blood vessels are red that are covered over the eye, and take away from sight their work and weaken the eye every day.  
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that first you look if the eye, in which it is, is good, and there is no other illness except the evil eye; therefore coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your own, then suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and be the needles subtle double according to this form. 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two lines by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil as forces those vessels subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those vessels out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those vessels; and when you will have done this, then distill in the eye collyrium green and red for to corrupt what is remained of the blood vessel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather all of these in that hour, make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and the abscess is sure to be hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and with sharp medicine according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of this form; and it is called “sharp chief,” and it is made of iron one chief point, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this several times, then return the place to medicines drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the parts are united and flesh has grown, and the body of the bow is united, and it remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not suppurating, know that it is healthy; if not, there is nothing else to do but bring back the fistula to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take I forest according to this form, and let the iron head be at 3 angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it upon the bone near the tear duct, and withdraw your hand from the eye's point, then turn all the way back as far as it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes into his skin if he holds his hand on his forehead; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens in its place, the matter goes to the forehead; thus it is easier for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open fully and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, then you must bind the patient; then cleanse, then place suction cups or a leech without harming to suck, then place on the eye i. one linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and apply a plaster on it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain them from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without harming; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must strain it a lot; then remove the linen after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then restart the plaster and cloths and the linen and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the dislocation of wool
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and there come forth fibers like .i. grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the lower part until the one above, then put another needle where there is .i. double thread from the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around it, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put on top the oil-like half in abundance of an egg; and let it stay until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from the oil, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eyes, and enter them immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the  bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This sickness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a film that is assembled in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the sick person sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the film come up to your eyes; then it should be fixed, and do not descend and let the light become scattered, and the sick person sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the film is not arranged as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and go on the cornea with the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and crown, as long as the bow emerges; and when it is out, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that is boiled and honey, then be cured with other cures until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the needles of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of wounds in division, and what is necessary to examine them; so operate according to health.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the sun's light, and tie their good eye and hold it tightly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the tip of the instrument beside the cornea by the width of a thread in that white part of the eye to the side of the tear duct, then insert the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and retract your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty thing; and it behooves that the measure of the way almagda is at the full length of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal membrane, then put the instrument up to where the liquid is, then express it drop by drop. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the water rises in the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and she does not rise, gently remove the almagda by turning your hand back and forth; and then put back a point of the veil gemme, and leave from there the oil inside.  
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by means of a fire the oiled cotton or wool steeped in rose oil and in abundance of egg, and tie with the sound eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top a coming crushed with an abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, because there are some men who have their eyes too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called «alberit», of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not make it too deep, but make it subtle then put almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with the bedding ahead of time so that he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be free from all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind it in this same dark house, and prove his sight, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this because the liquid rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address those who appease abscess; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put upon his face a little for to cover any day, and be in that dark house.  
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then it will go out of the house little by little, and turn into its state; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond pierced, to which one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almonds, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of grain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of these of this same subtlety, and the hind in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the bone
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes are born or are made various kinds of chars, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs; and if there is one such where the flesh has a bad color, and if it has flesh of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that one of these carts which is soft and not yet cracked, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and put the sponge on those carts, and the air out; then cut what you can hold with the sharp spatula from one side, until you know that the cart is completely removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that one cannot cover, then open it all, i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if without a sore or abscess, then support it as is fitting; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize it until the blood is seared and all the pus is removed, then put on either oil or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh newly in the bone above, because the instruments cannot come to cut: therefore it is necessary that you put I thread of linen a little thick, and be moistened with hands ours, and have between each knot a space I must or less; and put the patient’s shoulder the thread in his nose at its end, and pull gently until it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do thus the children in schools, and this is an easy thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other, being careful as we are which are or thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know that the new have corrupted that flesh, then treat the child, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back into the wound as before; do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the wound a bandage of felt for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, as oil and medicines are distilled into it: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a basket, and lead it so; and if you see fit, make a closed basket, and let the instruments be full for cleansing the head; and have one handle at the top for holding it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the bone
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times at the head of the bone a sickness arises which is called "telul", and grows and becomes great afterward, so much that it is a terrible sight to behold; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and pull out all the bone, then put upon its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, beware if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, because when one cuts it any time, there comes great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching, not of dark color, and you see that one can entirely cut it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure its place with things drying and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the bone is cut and sutured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these working cartilage pages, it profits little, for in some men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, if it is seen that the wound is fresh to all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a suture, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a suture, and restrain them, and powder above powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it comes out by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In men's mouths happen within the lips abscess hard, seeming to grains of times, and lesser and greater; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and fends upon each one, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then apply there after the incision of vitriol ground, until the blood be stanched; and then the leave of this, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times flesh arises upon the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and leave to run the blood or serum; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is smelly; so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your saint, and pull out the teeth or scabs appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do of the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other spots, until they are removed; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, then re-begin on the second day and the third, until you have pulled everything out; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to pull out, according to what the work shows, because the razor with which one pulls out the teeth outside have other forms than those that are pulled between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to drain as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth aching. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient is felt, and he thinks that it is a tooth of Saint, and makes the milk of the good tooth; and nonetheless the pain departs not from him because of this, until the evil is extracted, for we have already seen to do this to our seniors; and when you are well certain of the tooth aching, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all its.  A spatula strong to guard the gums from all parts; then he moves to your two or with tweezers subtle at the first hole and hole, until it is well loosened, then firmly he affirms the tweezers; and let the chin of the patient in your saint between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out further, take any of these instruments and put it inside each side gently, and move it as you did first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the perforations are; and if you hold it gently with tweezers, so that it does not break when you hold it; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gums to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore be well on guard that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient by the malice of the root more great pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard yourself that you do not act as the ignorant healers who by their haste and boldness break sometimes a bone, and they do not bring them what we have recounted; but they cause often by the incision of those great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or by the bone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if blood flows from it, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol ground; and if this does not work, cauterize it.  
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which one must first use the teeth, are to be long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed to hold well.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary that you place on it softened cotton in butter for a day or two.  
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the eyes are healed over, put in the pliers which are called "algefri", so that the shoulder appears like a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is its shape. 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should not be able to break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are such diseases where the old ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one does not break the bone or the other bones, or where it is possible, then seek the instruments that are necessary, as I have said, and help with gestures, this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, so the king has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or polish it; therefore, the chisel; and if it is next to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to 1 small beak, and be of sharp iron at its tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope little by little in hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, if the file of a certain form like this is.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file used to make needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in hands for days lightly, so that it does not move until it is finished; then the plane at the end with no scratch, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is loose, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it moves without hurting, and you have cured it with constricting medicines, and it does not work; if it is necessary to restrict it with a thread of gold, because the silver thread becomes green and putrid, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see fit to guide the teeth, then take the thread and bring it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the teeth between the good teeth, if there are one or more, until you come wisely up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the wires of the file with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and put it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then let it remain as tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the wires break, so restrain it with another wire; let it remain and will serve thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two sound teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:  
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, so it is put back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and suffering, and at some time the form of a tooth of bone of beechwood is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restricted as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or nature itself; which is born like this; or by accident of a wound glued together; and the work is such that you work the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament with wide incisions, until the tongue is dislodged from its place; and if there is stiffness or hardness, and it is due to a wound's stitching, so put the awl and cut the ligament with wide incisions; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done this, lift the dew of rose water and assil, or of cold water; then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and band the sick person every night, so that the place may not close. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the discharge of blood comes, then put on it ground vitriol; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatment until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of rusty color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards whiteness, and there is moisture, then put down the awl, and cut it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other. And if the blood does not stop at your work, then put on top ground vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you extract everything; then raise the cloth of rose water and of seil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come within the throat bumps that are called “godath,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and of fusse color, then do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent blood loss; but leave it until it is mature, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color, round, and the root is fine, have the instrument ready to cover, but first look if the abscess boils rests and is calmed. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be on your hand, and open his mouth and put the pliers between his hands, and press the tongue under the instrument, because this is the form; and be of silver or steel as fine as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue down onto this entire instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and put it into the almond, and pull upwards as much as you can; and pull nothing else from the tissues with it, then cut with the instrument, from this comes the form that resembles a force; and nevertheless the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut with tongs, from this comes the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be trenchant on one side, and on the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and thus, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then cure it until it is healed; and no time arise in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them as the two almonds, always.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was in her throat, that is to say the abscess of small size; and I had well closed the entire throat so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high raised that it had to be cut open with two incisions through the two openings of the nose. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had therefore at once, and placed one incision in the middle, then drew out the pus, and drew out a large portion of pus; then I made another opening on the other side near the two incisions, and opened the mouth and pressed down the tongue; after that, I placed the knife in these abscesses, and cut into one part, and there came out only a little blood; and thus was cleaned the woman's throat passage, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back together, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I tightened it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and only know what God did to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it is gathered in the eye, and it is full and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is quite large and round, it is called "eye". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the chapped abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it behooves you to cut it; and the one that is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then it behooves you to close the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.  
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It therefore behooves you, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made mention above; then insert the probe into the eye, and pull it out, and the scoop of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of the cut, then it is necessary that you use an instrument to the cauterizing of the senses of fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp pointed. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in this chapter of cautery, and confides with a lively sharp cloth so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the tip of this instrument, for this is its form:  
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on his head a hair or where one puts the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine above the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle run from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the windpipe; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burning and the bite of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to recommence the cauterization of the medicine, commence it again, and after the cauterization, wipe around the grape, with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be raised with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and put it inside, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it silver or iron, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, until the eye is deadened; after that restart it often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put inside its head a sliver of egg so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the sliver of egg does not allow the steam to burden the mouth, and it is good cure altogether salvation. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is lodged in the throat a bone or spine of fish, or any thing; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it will draw out the thing dry by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will lodge itself, and then you will draw it out further; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take one instrument of plumwood according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head high raised; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to naught, nor thrust in the bone; and move it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, for he will know whether or not the thing is harsh; so thrust down, or draw it forth with all the instrument equally, as long as it be forth.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the bleeding of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No times is medicine the woundless, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not profit, then look in the throat of the sick person to the sun, then that you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the bandage, treat it with all the smallest pincers or subtle tongs that are fit for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't work, take a well-bred dog and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the tip of the dog’s fur on fire, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient remains with a fever all day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full the cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and place it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he falls. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will descend without tarrying.  
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are burning coals, and have the bottom covered with a covering pierced in the middle, and in it place the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation in, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not go out, but comes until the nostrils; and the nostrils will now run, and if they do not run, begin the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and munch things salty and others, and drink no water; and then it is necessary for it to be gone by this government. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, like tongs curved so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the semblance of a bird's beak, and it has an asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory comes afterward in this book, and they are diverse in puncture and size; and it is in two ways one of which is in its own resemblance, and that which it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the eyes where they are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscess of the head is other than that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is other than that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work. 
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one should not pierce until the boil is mature according to its completion; and if to those it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it be so until it is rotten and festering, by adventure the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is near the base, pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess without complete digestion, except for the one near the base, so that it does not go too deep, and be lengthened inside, and a fistula comes; and cannot heal in a long time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its fulfillment, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the part of the fever diminished, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the shaking and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where the most dependent part of the abscess is, and where it appears to bulge; and be the piercing long in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their places equally where there is no crease.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that ache, according to which member. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you let the opening remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before those, then the body of the venin will be lengthened from him, and is full of much filth; and by chance it hardens the lips and the depths of him.  
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess which are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the heart, and cover; when it is healed as well as the drapes, and is withered, then it is necessary to do as one does with buboes: and if there are some that are cut in III angles, and if there are some that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angers; and if there are some where one makes a round size, and other sizes and similar incisions.  
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no chief, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing straight away; do this many times from small to large, until the pus is all gone; same as if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man decrepit.  
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits sometimes emerge with the issue of the bowels, that by chance may kill the patient, and you do not take care. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, so wipe the wound, and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, so administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have brought it together, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or lint shavings without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then the bone, and cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bloodletting occurs in your work, so administer cold water and easily, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the site of bleeding many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, administer government and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and drapes moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on drapes moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come to the head, and are mannered like us that are in webs, as the twig of a hawthorn, and much in likenesses. 
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture also as wrists; and there are some which are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you prove to all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", because its shape comes after here, what it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, dry it from above with a long one. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is dried, one scrapes without leaving the hair that contains the moisture, because it returns readily when one leaves it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and clean those which are remaining from the night.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin again the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the wound; then cure the wound with ointment as is fitting, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the fat, so cut according to this form, long; and put your oncines there, and the skin off from all sides, and put all your care to draw out the pus where it lies; and if the artery makes you opposite, so do what I told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is pus-filled, and of its cutting and curing as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting above a pus-filled abscess and moist one is lighter because they are of little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and from these fut I abscesses that I copied or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had made any incision in it, one would have done him as well as with a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, for those which come to the chief of the children and to the roots of the ears, let the opening be always at the most dependent place, so that it may issue pus well; and treat them as is necessary. 
des scrophules	of scrofulous sores
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other places or parts of the body, and they are bad, and they are intertwined with each other. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofulous is properly within its side, as the new and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulous are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and if there are wicked ones who do not want to obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that which you see of good disposition at the touch, and similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not averse to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape it from each part, and are the two lips of the heart as incisions, if you have need for it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be too spathe nor trenchant, so that the hands escape, and do not see too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that restrain blood, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleaned, return to your work, until you complete it; then, examine with your index finger if there are any small pustules, if so, cut them and remove them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if in the root of the scrofulous vein there is a great one, it does not behoove you that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without nuisance; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure.  
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, because there is no longer any superfluity for the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	so it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and draw forth pus, and cut as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce there where it opens more; and pierce thus as the one before said, in depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then the cure of ointment engenders flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	of scabies
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of cutting open the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cut open; and do not help them because all veins and the pores of the sick are hot at these who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2. almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below III circles or IV a small incision across, between the II circles or by the quantity of the incision of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and these are so suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no meat, and the vessels are long from it. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to the whole neck, then fends the neck as much as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that it jumps from the place which is broken, and by the fault of the voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone against the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this command the ancients to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in III days or in IIII. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as long as it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.  
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took the knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; and I was called by her to cure her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and well that it had not yet cut a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were thereby brought out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I bandaged it and I treated the wound until it healed; and the lady did not have any other problem but that she was hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her disposition; for this reason I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.  
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called “throat hernia,” and it is a large abscess in the color of a blister, and is most common in women; and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; the natural has no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not suit to work to do hard than in this one who is small, and probes and searches at all the intro. If you find it as I fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as we cut the fat, and treat it at all its edge, if there is any; and encircle well soon, and cure it as it is due, until it be perfectly healed.
des nous	of ours
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are to us, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between our and exit. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that a lesion is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; therefore rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the boil, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a pimple, and becomes large; and they are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire into all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to what its form will be or chapter which comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of probing abscesses as we do is that you prick or moisten the place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points (and points), until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then after it be according to the size of the abscess; then remove the probe, and take care in what jumps out.  
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs short, what color it has, do as I have said about other abscesses; and if after the introduction no moisture comes, know that it is fat, so do it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and scrape lightly on each side and ward the coat where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the new; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car if it remains nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little, and the wound grieves you, apply powders corrosive to the wound and restrain the wound, and put above soothing things an abscess of hot, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the wound is great, sew the two lips of the wound, and cure it of what causes flesh.  
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is too weak or otherwise you are in haste and apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound purges, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to covering those that remain from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the introiter instruments, and they are in III ways: great and medium and small; and there are III squares that are called "albaret", and I which is called "breb", and there are also in III ways: large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and most valuable are those that are yellow, and they are more proven by black pitch to enclose the fistulous sinuses; and they are in III ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wounds. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are probes that have II curves of III ways also; and there are probes that have III curves, and are also of III ways; and there are probes that have II curves, and probes of a single curve only, and are of III ways; and all these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these are made cutting, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we scrape the nerves with, so one does not cut the vein or nerve; and of these instruments are the alemeles put back into handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only on their fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groin, and similar ones; and sometimes one makes the other instrument small, resembling scalpel handles, according to this form, for which one takes blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one puts it sometimes in the place which is healthy to cut veins, and arteries, and sometimes around according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like the breasts of women; and they remain swollen and disfigured, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form from this line .b. up to .g.. 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if the swelling goes down, and it softens like in women, then make two incisions in the ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the discharge of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining and fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous lumps or boils which contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who have moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment after this as long as it is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a boil, then treat it as we have said for cutting boils, and if the wound returns pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin above is sewn together, many times abscesses come about, and it happens also to a vein swollen and with an abscess; and if one knows whether it is for the artery, then the abscess grows long from the cutting; and when you feel it in your fingers, you feel it strained; and when it is for the vein, it appears red as fire; and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is under the armpits and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron cure, and he who is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is inflamed by an artery by raising the skin of the long; then work the waist as soon as possible, and depart beautifully the artery from the fabrics, until it is uncovered; then put under it a needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and strain the artery with a double thread in II lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in temples; then point the place that is between the II links of an intromittent as long as the pus that is there comes out, and be sure to the abscess; then administer the cure that engenders bowel, until the thread falls; then cure those of ointment coming after these, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be the double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the thread of one of II parts as II heads of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads are not going out, then put another needle to all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and strain the threads in IIII lengths; then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity of the keur and leave what is tied; then put on top of the moist cloth in wine and oil, then administer cures of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often to the shoulders and hips, and in all their places where there are joints, and this is a grief abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is restrained forcefully, the patient feels pain, and is not completely in line with the body, but below the heart; and moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear that there would be contraction; and the one that is on the head or forehead, makes the skin to the spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a thread, and peel it, then scrape it clean and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to fungi, and it is the roots subtle, and the head big; and there are some small and very large; and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had fine root, and they were slightly split, and oozing moisture from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the work in the incision is that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if the cope to the spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to the fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist, there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if it does not stop, then quickly cauterize; and if you see the patient is fearful and frightened of the incision of iron, take a well-made lead thread, and tie the limb as we have said, and leave it for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the lead thread until it closes the limb, and heals by itself; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut them all the same for the belly, but you can well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep from cutting the tendon which is of a faint color and poor sense and milk-like.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil has festered
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or split in the skin, and is on the belly and some of the boils, as they have in other cuts, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness; and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens through diverse issues. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two sides it rises up, and then returns, and perhaps it is constricted, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses thick and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is puffed up to the touch, and the work is that you look whether its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So it is necessary that you leave the cure. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, it befits that you command the patient to hold his arm, and be outstretched straight, then grasp all around the boil; then command him to move gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upwards to the whole great incision; then bind it around with a strong thread, or a rope of strong silk firmly, and let it be new bound; then work the half of the abscess extended above the linen, and put your index finger, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught in the linen, then untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly; and if you find the boil, then take it at the incision, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, then go well around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II through thread, and put the II needles around what you have done in a cross that you make appear; then strain the abscess in IIII leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place remain as long as it will rot, and allow the dead flesh to fall away by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it of what is necessary, and finish the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is necessary, and join the place. 
dou chancre	for the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the appearances of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that the ulcer is generated in the marsh, and great caution should be exercised in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the armpit, and in the groin, and similar places, then one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never healed any, nor has anyone healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge at any time the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then prepare the patient i.e. good place to make the work; then get your tweezers or chancre, and the hair on all sides, and the bone on all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and compress the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding goes against you of the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding is extinguished; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: this is only; and one must not touch iron in these II likenesses: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called “eclytes” with medicines, and the cure does not profit, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness than dropsy, such as coughs and solution of belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: raise the patient straight up on your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part below the ribs, then take the espinous spatumil according to this form:  
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut from both sides. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point, and nevertheless it should not be so deep that it can come as far as the intestine when you insert it, and do not let it bleed; then look if the hydropsy is engendered towards the intestines: if so, you should cut into it from below the third finger bone, slightly to the right of the sword; and if the hydropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then make the incision to the left of the third finger bone; and if it is due to the spleen, then to the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to the weaker part; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and let it out, and lift your hand to the spatula between the skin and the syphac as much as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syphac until the spatula comes to the point where there is water, and this is the place for the water, then drive the water out, and insert this instrument from here which is the form:  
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of iron or light bronze, and at the bottom part it has one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and on another, two; and on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather. 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the vein is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now onto the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than what is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart that stops the opening which is on the syfac, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then restart the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering with this, and treat from the point a small quantity; do this any day, and guard yourself from following until it remains no more than a bit of point.  
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt on the patient, and give him much water, so cure him of burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bath and in the sun, and keep from drinking; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	At no time are children born without a hole in the penis, or with a small hole, or with it not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, then he must be able to see at all times through the very subtle spatula according to this form: 
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put where the little sharp pointed thing of bronze, and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four and when he wants to urinate, have the clamp removed, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not needed because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, if he medicates with the honey of pine as we have said, it shall widen. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the part in their place are blue, because none are born with it at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before raising their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the glans, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and are the head of the rod and the cup as well as the waist of a pen, so that the pierced one falls in the middle, as it should; and guard against bleeding that comes many times, and if it happens, with the sponge of those who sponge blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blemishes come in the rod, and it is a foul appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with one subtle needle, and scrape and cleanse them all, then put upon cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diaficon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of bad color and painful, then you must apply cautery to it.  
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have captured it, and if the spur is in its socket, and has part within the skin and part outside, then you must remove the spur which is inside first; and when it is cured, then treat the outer part. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, make sure the head of the stick is not pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its stick and groin; so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then put on top the ointment of honey and flour which is made of apple tree bark and herbs, then treat it with other dressings until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two conditions together: that is to say, for the reduction of blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert or conduct a stick into the penis, and urinate on the patient among; and when the hair is irritated at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if it is a serious thing to consider this, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the spatula a little bit at the head of the penis and the hair; then separate them well, and put in between them the fine linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not irritate further. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a wound of continuous bleeding like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not say circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the most part of the masters and healers who performed circumcision around i.e., in one dal, and with force, and a whole new knife; so it was the worse for them because there are two cloths, and by chance if one cuts the top and leaves the bottom one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound should be covered, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done by the dal' it isn't assured the point of the member; and in the purification of the knee, by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they don't have need of purification and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with force to all of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut well just as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, so that the sizes are equal in all parts of the soul; but that the thread should be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first work is as if you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the member just so, and then let him jump in all ways that you can; then let him be between your hands straight, and bring back the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the member and blow or heart, and move it up until the head of the member is inside; then cleanse it well of the filth which is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under one pock to the other thread; and hold it as II does by the second lieeure to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the II threads, then lift the heart upwards carefully and move the head of the member; then let the blood come out poco a poco, because that is the remedy; and put powder on and on top of the powder I drape with a yolk of an egg cooked softened in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and let it stay until the next day, and cure it from other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the cleansing is this: the two heads should be held and should be sharp, and the heads are also as large as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification is when the kerchief inside is at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger so that the leaf makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take tenaculum and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they are three days and what is below the shaft is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has calmed, and lightly exfoliate it; then cut it as much as you can, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the wound of things suddenly with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut the kerchief excessively, and it goes upward, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is from the stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine isn't released, and you see the retention for the stone which is there or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and they should place the feet on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient’s arms as much as he can; and thus is constrained the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone upwards, for which reason the urine is released; and if it doesn't come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of this is the form: and be of subtle silver light, like the feather of a bird; and be the cane half a palm long, and be subtle at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the head of the wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bulb; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and the patient feels it come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except for that which leads or where it goes is twisted; then is the thread all the wool head and head, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make correct the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood come in the bladder, or there is assembled rot, and you see it distill with sharp and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the ends of the chevez so that the medicine be such that it stops the rod well without addition, if one can drain the moisture, and put out when necessary; and when you want to put your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the clyster in the moisture, and pull with the string which is inside; if you pull the moisture into the clyster, and then firmly reinsert the string inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster by which one clysterses the bladder: thus it is: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And is of silver or of archute, and is the shoulder higher; and below to the breast where the ligament falls; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture which you see clistizing the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming with a double strong thread, and heat the end of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the rectum, then strain your hand upon the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it in a circle, and pierce it round through; then put the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside that which you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare-like, and causes the patient pain in his penis, and he thrusts many times, and then finishes; and after much of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have 4 years, and it is very grievous in old men, and is as medium to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and pull them and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and emerges from its high place; then make him sit between your hands, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder be entirely declining downwards; then touch it and feel it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the touch at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it in its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press upward with your finger, and push it out towards the place where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he extend his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then put the spatula cutting, of this it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between those who are between the hams and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight over the stone, and your two sides are either foundation or bottom, and let the waist be like a travers so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, and not too large; by chance the press the sides which are foundation or bottom, that it may burst without labor; and know that there are some stones that have angles, and margins: such is good to be issued; and if there is one that is rounded, like a gland, and round, whose issue is light. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To those who have an angle and margin, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, it is necessary that you pull upwards with the pliers which are like a file at the top, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the instrument subtle curved at the top; and if you cannot manage it this way, then widen the hole of the opening, and if it is not clear, then tighten the vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first put the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then pull out the stone, and the smaller ones afterward if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be treated, and make a larger wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For the two things that happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out through the place where the veins cannot join together; but nonetheless, you make an effort to drain it or break it with pliers, until you draw it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon’s blood to the wound, bind it tightly, and put a soft cloth on top, soaked in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you unbind it, wash the place well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basil oil, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if boils come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and by this retention the urine is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: thus do you then in the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and it will burn; then raise the wound of water and of aisil and of seil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it behooves that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the spot. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is where the urethra leads, and it is fixed inside, and the urine cannot flow out; so the cure of those that I say thus, that you cut it many times, there are excuses for cutting by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved this thus. 
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron in this form and be it at three angles, fastened into one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then thrust the forest into the shaft lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the forest in your hand at the stone point by point, until you can feel the stone on the other side; then shortly will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is then broken, and thrown out with the urine, and healed for the patient; and if you cannot do this because of any thing that forbids it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make the rod go into place the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and purify the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is the cure grievous, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is one cannot find a woman well knowing who undresses herself to the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the woman's stone is more deep than the man's stone, so it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you find a midwife well knowing, and with pains she is found, and if you do not find one, then it is better to cast a mirror subtle; and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the examination of the stone; and look well that the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to push her buttock or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she confines it below her buttock, and recommends her to push her buttock or con the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder form. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the cone, where it is seen appeared, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move its two above the stone or below, and let the tail be first small; then put the loin in the loin, if you feel the stone so near the wound as long as the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have reins. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the likenesses to know the outcome. 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone has not yet come out, then put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the stone is discharged; then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting the stone from men to help you in your work; and if the stone has not yet come out, and it is the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the wound and hold it with bandages and don't start again this one, and leave the stone and do not draw it any more, for fear that the patient may die; then cure the wound.  
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the parts are healed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is under the heart of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and at times it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e. another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have this point no.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either declining to jaundice, or red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess renews, like long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is redden with part of the egg, and for that reason one thinks that it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syfac, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, it appears to the whole intromittent quarrel, because its form is beforehand.  
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him much of cloth; then sit on his left, and command the minister that he sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the joints; then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the joints among them long up to below the elbow, and let your cutting be straight dividing the skin of the joints until the white flesh, and the peel subtly according to your strength; then pierce the white flesh full of water at the large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your pins, and extend the white flesh upward; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white flesh; cut all or in pieces even the bone of him subtly, that if you do not cut it well skillfully, it will return the water; and if the work is good in your hand, then put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the white flesh; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the joints to a seam, then cure it as other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the leaf corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the outflow of blood; then cut the coion at all the suspensory, and draw out the leaf, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part as you have done the first evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the fresh wound half-soaked in rose oil; and put on top another wool piece soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the two piles, and put double cloths on top, and tie it up with all the linen according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use them of wool fleece according to this likeness, and let them be assembled by sewing in the groin of the breeches, and one of the ends prick over the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and the other two chiefs above the two shoulders, and let all assembly the restraint in the buckle of the braier; and once is medicine this ramice of cautery in place of a knife of iron, and it is that you prick the knife-like cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be scorched as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scorch it with this subtle cautery hot: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cop in all ways that you can, as long as you reach everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more salve; and moves guarding from a decrease of blood, and moves that the works of size; and if nothing makes contrary to you, or abscesses or decreases of blood or another thing, so cure what makes contrary to you, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the watery root is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with all the spatula wide, and put the perforation deep into the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the spot, and tie it up, and leave to drain the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must put a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, of which the form is before; and widen the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and so will the patient pass his days. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the genitals
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, for which it seems to me that one should leave it; and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; and it is by many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by superfluity sour and ague, which is spread to the joints, or by percussion; and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by chance are some abscesses grievous painful and stony, and of livid color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from swelling of vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When this is by way of artery, it is known by the arrangement of hot abscess, when you press it to your hands; and it is not fitting that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the inflation of vein is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch of the two, and can well make the cut on this resemblance, and on the other charts; and that you cut the heart of the coins, then being the egg on high, and the train farther from the white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard with these shells, then it behooves you to draw the egg and cut it; and if it is in the yolk, or in what is inside the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all that membrane and roundly cut it. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cartilage is or its back, it behooves you to cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the genitals
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling the yolk of an egg, with the softening of the boils, and the patient cries out when he goes; and the treatment of this disease is as dangerous as before, nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the raised seat, then put the suspender of the testicles down to your feet, over all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them with strips, and stretch them; then cut with a sharp spatula wide through the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in temples; then insert a needle where the vein has come out, and tie it at the first place where the vein has arrived, and tie it directly to the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with others where one injures the bow, so that no vessel is left that could nourish one of the testicles; for by this, no evil comes, and if to all the vessels blood comes, it is necessary to drain the testicles at all the vessels; so that the veins do not lose their nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be healed. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are by the section that comes or therefac, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, because intestine descends from that rupture to one of the sides; and this rupture is either at therefac, or of the extension of it, and these two manners of mouth of causes: or of percussion, or of leap, or of braire, or of lifting heavy burdens, and by similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of therefac, is that they have pain and pain, in long time, and does not come suddenly; and are the abscesses even up to the navel, because the therefac presses on the intestine. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the syphac that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin close, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the syphac.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are caught with it, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, therefore it behooves one to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its place within the wound if it can enter; then be careful on his neck between your hands and lift the hips; then bring the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the buttocks long; then put inside the folds of the waist needles according to what you need for opening the wound, and such that the eyes may exit; then scrape the syfac which is below the skin of the buttocks, until the white syfac is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger into that which follows the buttock, in that which is between the white syfac which is below the skin of the navel, and the second syfac, and depart from what is behind the navel, and between the second syfac; and then move with the right hand into the heart of the buttocks, and hold the white syfac high in your left hand, and lift the navel to all the syfac towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the navel upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and inquire with your two hands if there is any intestine enveloped or white syfac hard, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below; then take a needle which has a thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, of which we have said which is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of II parts; then envelope the hairs of the threads, and tie them together of II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except an abscess should come there; and put straight the thread according to the first long thread II two of it, and after these II threads leave the syfac which is below the heart of the buttocks the greatest of a two; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the buttocks, as much as the sinew, and the bow, as we have said before; then administer wool moistened with oil, and put it into the wound, and put the thread that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never once is the white part of the face (the shoulder) that we have said cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the linen until it dries by itself; and if it delays in drying, let it be raised with hot water, and put on as we have said, until it dries; then cure the wound with other remedies, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancient ones said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vis, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels flow; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.  
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No times comes rupture in the bowels, as we have said, and opens the wounds; and do not send any of the intestines to the anus, and if it does, it is little, and repairs all hours; and still, if it remains too long in this point, so it grows the wound or abscess, as much as the intestine sends out; and this happens by the extension of the abscess which is in the bowels, as we have said, because it is extended, then is softened and inflamed the wounds and opens; and the cure is like cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes is cured by iron in this manner: and that the patient lies flat on his back between your hands, then cut the wound inflated of the large size according to the quantity of III fingers; and then extract the abscess which is under the skin that it follows, then take the thread and put it on the place appearing of the abscess; and press it at the bottom of the belly, then sew the II appearing wounds of the abscess upon the top of the thread, and sew one and the other; then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut the abscess nor extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the root of the intestines; then the cure by the cure of the wounds.  
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, disinfect it and care for the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fig is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times is softened the skin of the testicles in certain men, because those which are inside are softened, and it is made to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips with a suture, and if you see, first suture the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and throw away the thread.
dou chastrement	of the tightening
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisement is commonplace in our law, and for this reason, it would please me not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the wise ones should be able to answer when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often need the chastisement of some beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and cattle, and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterization is done according to two manners: or by attraction, or by cutting. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by traction, make the animal sit in hot water, until the tendons are softened and pliable; then taking them in your hand, hold them until they are put back and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the chastisement of size: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut on each one with a blow, when you have well scratched them; and leave no prick of the syfac and the subtle syfac that is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more mature than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction it may happen that nothing remains from the testicles, because of which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners in men: one way if between the two sexes it opens as much as the figure of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it is on the hip as well as a rod and two points. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of man and woman is that you cauterize all the adhered sores, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the genitals, there is no treatment. 
de la tentigene	Of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tendinitis is a hard knot attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tendon with your hand or tongs, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occurs; then treat the rest until it is healed; and for another sore that arises at the mouth of the anus, and the temple, and perhaps jump out, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it by the ancients "disease of the cow." 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cover it, as we have said the bandage, and the care until it is healed.  
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and is natural by birth, or accident by illness that has come to be; or it is by cartilage joined, or by subtle or thick syfac, and is made in the belly, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever; and prevent conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the regard of the bailer. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppage is near appearing, so whether it be to your two or to the right. 
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is the subtle disease, and it is close to the two books, then hasten, and say this: put your two finger indices together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then as the two books form, until the subtle disease is round, and be over the swelling; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lay the woman down at home each day, so that she cannot stir. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with the spatula seeming like a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stomachache is of flesh origin, then suspend it to the bed and the bandage; and apply blood-thinning medicines like dragon's blood, incense, along with a bit of egg white; then administer a large poultice of flaxseed so that the wound can not close; and thus be prolonged, and administer a linen tent of dry linen; then be treated with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes new flesh, if it is necessary to cover according to this manner, if it isn't festering abscesses.  
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess festering which is in the flesh, one must not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without customary treatment, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tough; and we have said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are swollen in the marsh, and do not appear to smell, except for the cure by iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marshes, one can feel, are those one can cure.  
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then the head of the bed with pliers, and the cap at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and willow and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confect it with honey and oil, and apply a plaster to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he endures it, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this is not the case, if to him applied leeches on his back and breasts without hurting him; then take wool, and moisten it in juice of plantain or in juice of elder with old wine, and apply it there. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess heals, care for its place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called “albathir” is red, and is similar to the sharp chief, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text; and then the care until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and purulent abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more other illnesses that I have said in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not like other abscesses; and if you want to know the work of iron, then see if the abscess is raised at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let him suffer until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet to parts away from the leg; and let his hips be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good band; then pull him gently towards the right side, and there administer the instrument which works the mouth of the jaw, so that what comes after will show its form; and it is necessary when you see to administer this instrument that you put the point first in order to know the depth of the jaw, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and that it does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the jaw with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one wipes it with a soft hand, it is necessary to cover at the top with a spatula, and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary that you put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil or green dry oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the edge of the ridge, and put outside on the ridge and on the pointed cotton swab wet with water or malves be boiled; then cure after II days of ointment coming to this, until it is healed; and at any time raise the ridge and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and arnica long be boiled; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed back into its socket, then it behooves you to guard against iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman pressing downwards, and desiring to smell the air: then she hastens the child to come forth with force; therefore, you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the head first, and the second follows after; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes quickly; because when it emerges from its head, then the second follows after, and it is cleaned of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes on its feet, and comes to force the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes on its belly, or groin, and is converted by chance on its neck, and by other bad figures; so there is need for the healer that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes upon its head by natural birth, and the woman is in labor and giving birth hard, and the virtues of it are weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her; and rise its nature of oil or fennel seed that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs with the little spatula which here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and cut at its nail until the moisture that is within it flows out; and take the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with musk mallow with sesame oil; then make her cough and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose an hour: thus now the child will be born. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, it is necessary that you put them gently in and out; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on the seat, and raise her feet up; then take the seat off the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when taking it down; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands with the knife that is placed in front, and extract the child, and put them back in evenly.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on his feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon his feet, it is necessary to push them upwards; and then turn them back and forth, until they are even; then grasp his feet and extend them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He jumps until his hips if he is commanded to take it, and then causes him to sneeze by condition; if it is stronger, God wills it. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forward as we have said, then take a mixture of althea and sesame oil and melted gum, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make the collar of myrrh and put it below, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, because the child jumps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands foot and foot; then let him be laid on his neck, and let the feet hang down, and let him lie on the bed; and bend his hands foot and foot, and then takes his hands above the belly, and removes the cushions below, until she is well prepared down; and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them, then moves the belly up, then puts his hands; and move the child foot and foot; and command the woman to hold on as long as the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes out with a wide hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to try to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, have the woman rise and walk; if she cannot walk, have her lie down on her bed and spread out her legs; then administer the poultice that I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, have her sit on the stool, then try to bring back the hand; and guide the child according to its natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to suckle as long as the child is breathing. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the delivery of the child on his neck, and have his hands spread out, and his face turned toward the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient keep his hand, then turn it back and forth, and the eye lightly; and when it is equalized, he puts on the nature of muscle padding of altee and oil, as we have said, then he commands her to move back and forth; and when you will have done this, he makes her sit on the seat, and commands her to grasp; and she sneezes. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner to all the spine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for the whole secondine, if the secondine is struck at its fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child can stand on its face and neck, then strike the head so that it is not held back, and make the child die; then put the child inside until you have put it as it should be, and command the woman to refrain from doing anything; therefore, it will come out easily. 
de l’issue des gemelz	from the separation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live at all, if they can be named; I know these, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the syfac which devises them, which is tied to the boude; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one of all others, as we have said.  
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue violently, so the cure as we have said, and let the bale be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it is worth to heal. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	At no time are they formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of their glorious sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because by chance seeming things happen; so do according to what is necessary.  
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident, or she has fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be sustained on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister holds the cloth from two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she does not move in the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with wool of altea and fenugrec and linseed, then anoint the hands with these oils and these wools; then put them in the womb lightly, then desire the place where she puts the tools to be suitable to those, and take ward if the child is appearing that it descends on its head; then put the tools in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or below the beard or in the forcele or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then you put them or pierce and at the mid-ribs; and it is necessary that he holds the tool in his right hand, and puts the curve between his thumbs of his left hand, and puts it to his whole hand lightly, and puts the tool in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the void thing; and this is the form of the tool: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then put one against the other one, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then the two in equal movement from side to side, so that they move smoothly, and let the instruments be toothed so that they hold firmly, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains of it, anoint the area with some of its oil, and place it in that part, and draw the other part; and if none remains, put this ointment or higher up there, and do this until it comes out completely.  
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward from the other, and it cannot be brought back by constriction, then you should wrap it in a cloth, until it is all straight; then cut at the joint of the palm or at the knife, and thus you must do with the other hand, and as for the feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's hip is large and it is obstructed at the exit, or if there is a sharp head assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your two hands, and make the head and remove the sharp; or you shall wrap it with the instrument called “almidach,” because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way do if the child has a large head naturally; and then draw the bones with pliers, and if the hip jumps out and is strained by force, then split it, until the moisture that is in or worse exit; and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is inflamed in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the well is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is entrapped in the belly or breast, it behooves you to extract it with the drapery wrapped around your hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture that is there is corrected; and if the other member is removed, and the head remains, then put your hand into the opening of the wound; and pull it out until the mouth of the wound; then put in the twine or thread, and pull forward; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed because of a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not behoove to work it, but rather administer moist and fatty things; and apply plasters, and soak with softening and moistening water. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, then administer what we have said in the living child; and if one has no power, then treat the body by parts, and leave nothing of the second part. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if they are administered the things that we have said about abscesses, which come in the marshes; and if blood comes out, it should be put in vinegar restraining, and administer other cures to them. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one fetus had been killed, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, it came an abscess in the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great suppuration.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I pondered long, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed a great deal because this one whose belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I touched the wound, and in between the bones of my hand, as long as the woman was in a better state; and I watched the woman for a long time like this, and it would come back a little bit from its place; and I have not recorded this chapter except because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the pressor, which we have in the books; and to two turns at two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tube I do to wide, and the edge of the trees I must, and long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs be two adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the handle to open when turning the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, in its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers; and it has two jaws with adjustments, as you see, an arm's length long, and two palms wide; and when you see opening the vagina with the whole instrument, have the woman sit on the bed, feet hanging and legs open, then put the two attachments together in the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the girl does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument are all surmounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have seen them appear, so much is more hasty the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her leg, and then have her sneeze with force, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well is it. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it does not, take an earthen pot, and make a hole or cover in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a band or opening of the pot, and the other chief in the mouth of the marsh, and tie it until the vapors come inside the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine is jumped upon suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not further healed, command the bailiff that she moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in alum ointment, and then put it into the nature, and desires the secondine. And when she has found it, seize it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not fall to the extraction; but it is convenient to move it gently to the right and left, and then pull; if it will come and disengage itself.  
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the mare is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, then guard that you do not use milk; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mare, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then clisterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon; so it will bear and return, and come forth; but nonetheless, when it bears if there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and the patient becomes pale. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary appropriate fumigations for those: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument for fumigating the woman at the time of childbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a dog, and one puts the head subtly in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let there be fumigations on the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burned, and restart another. 
de percier lou fondement	to examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by a subtle syfac: so it is necessary for the midwife that she pierces that syfac to its due, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatumile, and guards the lacement so that it does not touch; then puts on linen half-soaked in wine and oil, and then the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not re-stop, then put or pierce a cane of plomb, and leave him for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stupefaction comes from a closing of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closing; if it is cured, as we have said about the cautery of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular, and those that come from near the outside of the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when this nodulation is old, it works, and still moisture comes out white or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas pierce; and they are known by those who have them either by discharge or venting when the patient defecates, and perhaps in leaps some. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the junction of the groin, and up to the root of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the foundation, and not piercing: and it is that you thrust your right index or foundation, and thrust a fine needle of lead or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is a curvature, then put a tent of fine lead or horse hair, until you feel the tent or hair at your fingertip; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or venting or ver, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the passage of urine, so that urine flows out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes up to its place; if there is no twist and the invention of pain around, then it is that it is there bowed, and it does not value medicine or treatment by ointment; and in these fistulas passing there is no cure but labor, and vanity of fools' mirages who intervene in them. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one who is neither very young nor very old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced, and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of grain, or of plank if there is tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you must put your index finger there, and feel if he senses the pain; and be discovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if you do not work on it a little one cannot heal it.  
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says all things well it can be healed by this one, but it happens rarely; and the help that one does to it, if one scalds the subtle cautery according to the breadth of the fistula as it is said before; and throws it whole hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation; and make this two or three times, as long as you know that these charcoal are burned which seem like an eye feather; and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as those chars issue out; then the cure of ointment inciting cartilage and joining. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, that is good.  
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is the case, it cannot be healed otherwise; and if it protrudes between, and does not pierce to the point which is the foundation, and between your two parts and the protrusion a thick covering of flesh or silk, and you see the fistula at this following the covering from the heart; so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and thrust forward ahead of the protrusion, and then the cautery after, until it comes to the head of the protrusion; and will be delivered the protrusion, and will fall away; then carefully remove those tissues that seem like an owl's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows continuously, and goes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined bones, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of wet tents in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the bone has been burned within the wound; then cure the wound of swollen eyes by applying hard dried medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there is the cloth or the syfac or chars, where it is near to piercing, if there is no other way except the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure it as first; and do not go too far in parfont, that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and let the egestions come by the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the mund as soon as it is cut from its foundation, or by tent or by another appointed instrument; then mundefy that char fautree which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to remain the fistula in the part outside the foundation: it will be a lighter thing for the sick. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies along the base below the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: 
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it puts one thread twisted in two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, as if you put your knee or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and leave it for a day or two; and restrain it at no time, until the threads heal those chars that are between two, and stick together; then cure the wound as long as it is soldered and healed.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is not fitting to make a wound covering too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spine which one makes a fistula is very thick on one side and trenching; and on the other side no, for because you do not cut what you do not need to cut, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, they contain blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those which are outside have little moisture, and even though one or two drops of citrine water or a drop of blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation is that you command the patient to lie down in chambers, as long as the foundations leave him, and the threads appear; then hurry, and you can take them with tweezers, or you hold them with your finger, then cut them at their roots; and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moistures, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that be in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, then cure the other cures until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot leave, then administer a clyster to the patient, harsh and biting to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient gets up, and if the threads are outside the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you take them with your finger or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner: take I thread twisted and put it in a needle, then pull the thread upward and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle and so be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood; then put upon the foundation I cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put on the foundation, and command the patient that he rest; and then leave him as long as it drips, and when they will be dry, then cure with ointment and other cure, until it is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying of veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the sickness is old and the medicine is no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not leave it moist; then treat it as long as it heals as it should; and if it cannot heal, then begin scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is scraped; then treat it as long as it is healed.  
dou fremit	about trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants is a small appearance false before the body, and goes much in deep; and sometimes it finds it cold, and feels it as well like death of trembling, and comes in all the body, and more to the hands than other place. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a stick from an ostrich feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that stick on the boil, until the purple circles surround the boil all around; then turn your hand over the entire stick until you cut all around the boil, and put it in the center, and scrape the boil of its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, so do this of a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor pierce it, for to keep the two together, and move pressed And if you see it, so cauterize the furrow, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is a clyster made of silver or lead, or molten iron or mesh; and never are these instruments small and large, according to those who are administered them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore who are administered in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a rupture where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder blade is pierced inside; and on one side II pierced, and on the other I; and the belly where medicines are put in an animal bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole I must be spaced, then put into these holes I thread of strong thread, twisted in X or whatever around, and assemble the belly as it is a sheepskin; and when the medicine is inside, there is a string at the instrument before a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of the circle.  
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the chief with clyster of oil or of yolk of egg, or of a similar thing, then put it in gently; then the ministers squeeze its two hands together, until it is all visible, then take out the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to issue, then hold it as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night on his stomach, then there is more help.  
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him with a clyster for a disease of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to work well, so let him restart it until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle enema on which the skin is strained: 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or chief, and the bone is not broken, if take care that it is of gitement of stone or similar things, and the skin is quickly ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt vehemently an abscess hot: then do so immediately to bleed from the cephalic same as if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bleeding on the contrary of the part navy; and avoid the patient repletion of wine and thick meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let him lessen his meat, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in styptic wine; and if there is no abscess, he puts on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he has moved it with fire, put on some ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by tents, then join them with sutures, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a piece, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, also beans, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a skin rottenness and it does not reach the bone, so cut the rot completely, and throw it away, then cure; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, so seize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put into them this powder which unites as soon as the arsenic has worked.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for do not remove the medicine until it is healed.  
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have the frankincense nor the dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is moved by fire, even though it is in this state, do not put on this powder; but put some softened ointment, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it is wet; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.  
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then you shall extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you hereafter about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other thing to leave the cure, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the nerve and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as wormwood washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wormwood also washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.  
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so sew it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is broken and full of bone, pierce or lower there; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes, then cauterize it, and apply a bandage, and do what is necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is kept, by which the meat goes, then sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural figure; and then bind it tightly and leave it for some days, then cure with medicinal ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then set it; and if there are pieces of bone, then treat them outwards as much as you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave them as long as the wound weeps, and be freed and aligned with the exit; and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, look if from the wound there come air bubbles as the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder in at first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not drain out, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put attractive ointment on it, and tie it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound so that it sucks out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; so that there comes no spasm, nor tremor of heart nor strangling of air; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure therefore with tents and other dressings, as long as it is healing; and if it cannot heal, and work, then know that there is a fistula; so treat the wound as one should. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then the cure of those in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is deep into bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and the foreign objects outside if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound rot, so that it will lighten the extractions; and for other wounds in other limbs, judgment as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the stomach's displacement
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestines comes out, which introduces worms; and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than a small wound, because one puts the intestines back in with difficulty, if they do not put them back quickly; because the intestine inflates as soon as it feels cold, so they go back in with difficulty, and for this reason the average wound is worse, because one repositions the intestine to its place like the others II And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IIII manners: the II common stitches happen in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and II other stitches are proper and happen to the other wounds; and all the same they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has come out, and it is hard to close, it is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot water with squill and cypress and spice, and moisten the intestine as long as the inflammation is removed; and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is moved that awe sole for deflating. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or wine that they are cooked well, for by this is aligned the entrance a little; and if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument of which one cuts hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that tail, that none should cut it unless there be great necessity; and this is the instrument to split it: thus trench within in the curve and outside no, and see here the form. 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has jumped out, put it back in according to its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, because it is important for healing.  
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to what the injured part is higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and medium wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Little wounds put what appears to you, then have between your hands I minister pity that holds all the rupture in his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you prick an needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the chief of the wound I distance, and there put a needle where it has I good strong thread; and pierce the II heads of the skin with the II heads of the siphac, which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the II chiefs of the siphac the IV together; then the strain of a double thread around the needle of II parts, then assemble the II heads of the wound evenly, and then leave I distance, and there put another needle; then tie the end of the thread as you have done the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need needles, until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium, between subtle and thick, because the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason they must be medium; and it does not become well to put the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient when sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the heads of the needles for them to keep still, and let them be until the wound is closed; and this manner of suturing with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because it suffices one needle or II Li second suture if it is common, and it is that you assemble the II heads of the skin and the II heads of the syfac together with a needle where there is I medium strong thread; and when you will have pierced these heads all IV together, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews the robes; and put distance between each suture the thickness of a minor finger; this suture serves man, and I sewed a wound with a man's belly, which was cut by a knife, and it was the wound more than a palm wide, and it had intestines well II palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was healed for 15 days, and I cured him, and he was healthy.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mire had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where one did not find any, nor any medicines; and I put cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and I washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the II proper ways of sewing: take the needle, and put it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the core right through, lay the tip down on the skin where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it on the other, until the stitch is completely done.  
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which the Gauls call properly, is like any font, which assembles the two parts together naturally, and applies one end of the suture to the other end, in this manner: pierce an needle or the end of the thread near, and make it pass through that place only, and leave the two ends of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pass from the outer part to the inner, at the two ends of the suture; then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner, at two other threads of the needle that are on the other side; and this is the best manner of suturing and the most common.  
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galens says this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more serious than the others places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh in all its blood, as long as the artery has been moved, so put back the intestine, and the outside; then put on powder with ointment, and if the artery has been moved, put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound bleeds; and stitch the skin, and be joined the face, and the mirach; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, so put on, as soon as it begins to close, old cotton, and move it II times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not need other medicine in multiple arrangements as long as the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly with oil of tempered heat, or with rose oil, and put it around the armpits, and below the buttocks; and if it feels pain or rot in the belly, and many times happens, then give enemas of black wine, and even if the rot comes to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when this is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called «jeun» cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the placement of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.  
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the bone jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become brown or black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that bleeding does not come from it, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound up to the outside to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows.  
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, because I have seen that a man was pierced in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it festered and became a fistula, and from this there were excrement and wind; I put a cure according to what I could, and did not cease to treat it until it was healed, and the edges soldered. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewn, I doubted that the patient had poorly in his belly; and there was no bad, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and said any experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such manner: take fresh thread with large heads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips so that it strains its mouth up; and then cut the head, and this holds itself so that it cannot untie, then put the other thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is all closed; and stitch the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	That chief if it is burned in the intestine and no nuisance comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine of a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that be much cleansed, and then tie to the head of this thread I thread of flax subtle twisted, then put the thread in the needle and sew the intestine, and wind it in the rupture; and this manner of suture of threads is not worse than according to the way of hope and promise; and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the grails intestines, there is nothing else nor sanctification, except subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and even when it is closed and bowed inward. 
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth a knotted thing hard and white, where one feels no pain, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird; and sometimes in clear bowe, and other times thick; sometimes pointed, and other times enough; and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is nothing but by one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, that does not let flesh grow; or because there is too much bowe; or the pus is bad, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow healing, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones; and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it behooves me to make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas happen in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the syphons, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so on that comes to the property of the principal member, and to similar ones. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to where I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to know it, then take a tent of iron or of lead, if the fistula is straight, so if it is crooked; and if the fistula is twisted, so surround it with a subtle tent of lead, because the lead bends easily around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has holes and you cannot well surround it with tents, then clistirize it through one of the holes, because the moisture spreads from one hole to another, and it cleanses it; then surround it wisely as best you can, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and if it is pierced by them, and ask well the patient of the pain that he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the fault and the corrupted flesh that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep of right place, so it is necessary that you cut deep as much as you can, then put tents moistened in an acrid medicine, and place them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is remained at the bottom; and then put ointments cleansing healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, so cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, so cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not strike the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then cure the king as long as the corruption is completely removed, then cure the fleshly things until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns bent as before, know that you are not gone to the bottom: if uncover and go as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is so healed, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is so, know that corruption is too far along, that you cannot succeed there; if there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature; and if there is a little bone corrupted, and you can draw it with pliers, if you extract it with the instrument suitable for that, and if there are many bones, then draw them all together, leaving none; and if moisture makes you opposite, and there is no error or fear, cut and moisten and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something hindering rot, and let it be until the flesh is rotten around the bones, then they will have more easily the bones; and if it's a large bone, like of leg or thigh, so keep only the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption, and comes up to the marrow of the bone; then it must be cared for and covered all up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is united; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work.  
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and it became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open; but the healers by their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they corroded a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of holes that all festered and moist from the body; and many healers treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what flowed through the holes a great deal; and the flesh of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then proceeded, and dug into one of the openings until I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inner bone; I was assured by what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but could not suture it; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I removed it, and then tried to suture the place; but I could only dig around a palm of the bone, and the trace went all the way through its entirety, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healthy and healed quickly, and did not need to start again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For by the evacuation of blood he often became quite healthy, and in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was in good health and had no trouble or discomfort at all, neither going nor coming. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a linen strip and tie it to the head of the bone that opens, and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another linen strip thicker than the first one, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to be, so that the bone does not pierce the flesh; and put a splint or a board below the bone to help cover the corrupted flesh; and it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and treated again other times. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a stick underneath, and then with the one side to the other side the corruption, and let the thread be long as the length of the corruption; I say as we have said. And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and thread the bone where it contains on the other side. And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to do than to cut. And if the corruption is in the thumb of the hand, or in the thumb of the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opens for you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not make you contrary. And know that there are many incisions and threads to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their delicacy, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to equip each semblance of work with its instrument. And know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so consider the instrument that you need according to what is fitting. 
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can be harmed by things inside or outside; and when you have medicine for that corruption through the care of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes from so that the patient escapes through this death, or through the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the member becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and bristles after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of the member to member, and takes over the whole body; so haste to cover, and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a scorpion of the sea and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, cover it, and do not give him any space to come to the hand.   
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other treatment except the quantity of its virtue; and do this in all cases when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes to the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it mounts to the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other way but to leave the patient to death; and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on one of the ligaments down, and another minister on the other ligament up, and you dissect the flesh which is between the two ligaments a spatula wide, so that the bone is uncovered; then cut or sew, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the suture does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place carefully, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb wrapped in a good bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and this corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it engulfed the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and long after, the corrosion returned to him in his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that are helpful after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said to me that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of healing the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have recounted this story only for this reason, that when you need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place, and stays so long that it makes a great collection of pus; then it bursts and breaks open, and the pus flows out, as well as vessels; and the skin which is above is also as thin as linen cloth, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "boil" and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone even through, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is that you cut the whole skin around it, and even when it is thin, as well as linen cloth; and does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin has hardened, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, so treat with a clyster like this: see if the breast is large, and the bow which is in it is of foul odor, then cleanse with Egyptian medicine, which is made thus: take ashes, oil, and litharge, equally, and put the concoction into a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take some according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and clysterize the breast, and restrain the anus; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times, until the breast is purified, and the foulness is gone; and sometimes clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and clysterize, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey, or with a little ground litharge mixed in; or you can clysterize with honey and warmed wine, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine dries up the flesh; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, then clysterize with what makes flesh grow in it, and that is: take diaphana plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you can clysterize with some other medicines and ointments, about which I have spoken in the treatment of ointments; and if the wound of the breast is small, and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with a iron bit, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too wide, sew it up so that only the place where the clyster can enter remains open, and if the pus from the breast is on top, then cut or lower the area where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in place, do not let anything be put on it; and if you cannot cover the wound as you want, then arrange it in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest point that there is, for when the bow is in place, do not let anything be put on it, and if you cannot cover the wound as you want, then arrange it in such a way: that the bow goes lightly down, and do not leave anything of the bow; and take medicines that consolidate to put on the wound, and stay on top of the linen cloth that covers the whole wound; then cut forcefully at the opening of the chest a little wider than the first, then put ointment under the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the wound so as to align the bow, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once; and the one that is on the opening of the chest, often removes to take out the bow, and know what runs from the bow, if it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine has spread in this way, and you see nature that jumps on the wound, then know that the chest heals already, and approaches health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest lies bowed ingestible after many days, know that the chest does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after a long time, if it does not make you despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who late healing of flesh in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite; and if a bow is indigested jumps from the chest after many days, know that the breasts don't heal well; and if the breasts take long to heal, and are far apart, then adjust medicines drying moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaphinit, for there is great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment diafinit, and do it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and the same made honey cooked engroissment, when ointment diafinit is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue I drape it, and put it on the chest, and at times administer one long aristologe, and roots of celestial lily, which is also as flour of vetiver and centaury; and use of simple or of compounded: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the cure is lengthened, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is in depth, and makes impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs; so the cure of fistule, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, or the foot, or by chance arises in other places; and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then it comes to a swollen abscess, and runs and throws pus until it runs to the root of the finger, and perhaps all of it; and come the corrosions up to the bone, so much that there comes a putrid pain, and is the limb of the two large, and is the color flux. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut to it iron all the superfluity that is left from the wound, then cauterize the wound afterward. 
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the fingernail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and it begins to prick, and to turn blue, then it is necessary that you put the root under the nail so that the flesh does not rise, and throw it upwards, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the rest of the flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it carefully, for as long as the bone is corrupt it cannot heal; and if you see that the bone will become corrupt, then cut it in one of us as it was said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is broken and pushed, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal it. Then cut the angle of the spatula sharply by cutting sideways above, and guard so that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on top that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the sore does from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of us the thumbs. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any joint of the thigh does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the thigh, by chance moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.  
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint, is grievous to cure; so keep it from being cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the rear end, it is necessary that you cut first the fleshy roundness until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable thread for this, then cure it until it is healed.  
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The seams that come to two together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you tie this suture so that the parts repay according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of thin wood, until the bones are fused, as is necessary. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If soldering comes to none of its two with the palm, then that soldering as it is fitting.
des vils	of the bad 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large swollen vessels full of melancholic excesses, which come in more members of the body; and more happen in the legs of those who go on foot and who work and carry, than to others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging of colocynth, and then the herb from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is to cauterize and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it entirely.  
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The leg is treated in this manner: first, raise the leg in hot water very forcefully until the large vein becomes soft and pliable, then strain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the area below the knee; then cut the vein in I place, or II, or III, with a broad incision, then lift and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtues of the sick person can endure; and then tie it up and order him to remain on meat stewing adding black coal; and recommence the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and hurt the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: place the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in water and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by fire, and then cut above the vein from the top of the knee to the head of the thigh, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with the knife, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it; and it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord; then put the root underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then put it in the knife lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the raiser, as you did before, and put it on another knife, as you did first; then cut another piece, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the ankle of the foot, then lift and treat it up to the second cut; then strain from one cut to the next, until it comes out completely, then cut it; and if you cannot draw and lift it, put a needle in all the thick double thread, and tie and pull it, and put it under the root, and turn your hand on each side until it comes out; and keep it from cutting, for if it cuts, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it leads to discomfort for the patient; and when you have treated it completely, put wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one strikes the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not strike the vein; and it is of thick curve, because if it were thin, it would strike the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and it happens by chance to be born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes from within the body serpents and worms, embedded between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its place, and begins the vein to flow out, like a root of a plant.  
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head is open, it befits that you envelope around a piece of plank from one and a half to two inches, and the knot, and leave the plank on the leg, and all times that there is point at the end, then enclose around the plank, and the knot; and if it is too long, then cut off a part, and enclose the remaining, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely out; for if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings abscesses and rot to that place, and bad disease; therefore for this reason, it befits that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains on the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated of five palms of long, or ten, and one man came to me once, whose it was from ten palms of long, and when you cut it, it brings forth the root or through, and pierces it to the bottom, so that all comes out; and be emptied the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing rot any day, then cure it like abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes in this vein mains rains, and even when it opens at the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much of pus, and from which it jumps rain; cure therefore as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land “beef disease,” because it happens many times to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the edge of limb by limb, as long as it reaches the skin where it goes, and jumps; and is generated from rot of some humors, such as come worms and snakes and lice and roundworms in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him being cured and treated, it is not possible for him to go free until he heals; so it is necessary that you bind his place above and below with a strong ligature tightly, then cut above and treat the wound, and if the sting has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or chief near the eye, hold the eyebrow below it firmly, then cut above, and treat the wound; and it is necessary to use the patient with purification of body medicines solutives for the humors stored up, and avoid eating rotten meats. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and I saw after a little while, it rose as a worm at the shoulder, faster than any thing, like lively silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and went into the shoulder, and then after a little while it spread throughout the whole body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she was returning toward the other side of the body, as I saw her. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I have never seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have wanted many to move pain from their place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins discovered, and for this reason appeared that constraint of ventositez; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and veins covered. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, so lie above and below carefully, and then cut above as much as that windiness is constrained in place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, so cure him who removes the windiness, such as pills fetid, and pills of serapin, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and haired, and smooth; and some which have II angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; and the one which falls in any member falls according to II manners: or in a principal member as brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you after, appear to you: then it behoves you to refrain from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterward in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not yet deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syfac which is above the brain, is when there is scotomy and sode and esvertin and rouge in the eyes, and inflammation and rouge of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; and perhaps it without force from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses the speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moist white seeming to poults, and also leaps as burning of flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then hold yourself from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or core, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were tied in a hard thing, not empty; and perchance the seventh moves also like the hand, and comes out black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: know then without doubt that death will come. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the little arrow that does not come out is that without pains of foam leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the shoulder, it is near the ribs; and it gives great pain and great suffering and sighing; and it moves all the members from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and nothing of straw comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out with it and flows, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and necks and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and  forearms and hips and legs, and similar members, are saved according to more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason that you do something like that.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to the man with an arrow that stuck in the root of his nose: I pulled it out and dragged it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain at all. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And in a game an arrow was shot that fell into the grease of the oil under the paper, and the arrow was retrieved, and it could not be reached except for the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, at all light iron without ears; the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened to him.  
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And treat an arrow in the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and carefully extracted it as long as I did, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treat an arrow in a man, that it was in the chest or belly, and thought that he would die; and then when he had passed XXX days, he did not change his disposition; I cut above the arrow, and tightened it, and pulled it out, and there were no bad accidents. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has an arrow in his back or hip, and the wound was sewn up; and the arrow remains inside, and does not change its natural positions, nor finds inconvenience in any of its natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And look at another man, to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sutured; and he remained so suffering great pain; and many others like it. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treated an arrow in the man of princes the king, that it was lodged between his ribs, and was a little inclining to the right part; and the arrow was entirely set, I was called to the cure after that it was struck three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it with a very fine probe, and did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was from the point of the arrow I put on its place a poultice atractive and digestive, because the leg did not swell; and there appeared to me the legs of the arrow. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on the wound for several days, and closed the wound directly, and kept the patient there for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his body; and he told me this.  
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine sharp and corrosive for many days, until it was open, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which was hardening in place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and it progressed well the ends during IIII months, and then enlarged so much the wound that I put in tweezers, and mine on one side and the other, and could not exit; therefore I did not cease to subtilize and to devise ways of instruments, until I took I day the tweezers well made, according to those which its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the wise men judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed completely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you apply your care to those that I do not say, for the books cannot comprehend all; but the wise masters compare on well small things, and on those that are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are not from the members where they are fixed except according to II manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is by the place where it enters, it is an arrow entering in its flesh, and that which is no longer now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, leave it so long as the bone is carried around, and let the issue be healed; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it thus for several days, and move it every day; and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around to all I forest fine, until the hole around is enlarged, and then treat it.  
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: then do not remove it, but leave it until it is equal after some days, because if the arrow comes to this place, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not come to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, if the engine of the treatment.  
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply stuck and cannot be drawn out further, then administer the aforementioned poultice, as I have told you; then cure the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body, if one cannot see it, search all around it; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot by the narrowing of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then widen as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at what it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck from both parts to where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it out; and be careful that you do not break the arrow, that you draw it out more grievously. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then put it back into its place until the pain is reduced, then treat it, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes you go against it, administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter; and guard yourself from incision of the nerve and the vein, and put engine as well as you can move to draw out the arrow without peril, whether soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into it, for that is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees or feels nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in place if it can be seen or felt: cut therefore above, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: if it jumps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it there for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if it is of the arrow, take the entire shaft; and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer thrusting, then administer the tool with a pointed end so that the tip of the arrow enters into the point of the instrument; and then thrust, and if the arrow is lodged, put the instrument back in with the point entering again, in order to facilitate extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is surrounded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as is proper. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or at the bladder or at the ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it up, then it shall be covered. And guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound, if it is necessary; and care for it until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows are similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the tip of the bolt is like the feather of a bird, to insert at the point of the arrow, as this is its form. 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pliers to put in and to know if it is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one is healed, of which there are XVI in the head, that is to say: II veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and II veins that are in II tear ducts of II eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the neck; and the II veins that are on the throat; and the II veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and II veins that are under the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which are commonly used in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the ribs, and the common people call it “vein of the head”; and the middle one is called “fast”, and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it “vein of the heart”; and the basilica is on the right side of the ribs, and the common people call it “vein of the belly”, and it is above the fossa, and it is the one that we use to draw blood which opens clearly above the pouch.  
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and there are two of them; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: the one is below the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called “saphenous,” which is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bloodletting of the veins that are behind the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and with migraine; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their dependence on the head: then aim at your right side, and where you feel the pulse below your hip, so rule it; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well the two points of the passage, and make blood flow as much as you see; then strain and tie it, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting of the II arteries that are in the II temples, it is good for migraine old, and sudden, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of tears sharp at the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeding are as I say: and is that the patient restrains his neck, until the II veins appear openly; and feel the pulse below your right side, and then point down; then lift the heart above the vein on your right index, and put the lancet under, and lift the vein up, and the cut, as you have done in other veins, and do correction of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then the scab forms, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about them and their cutting and their extraction, or the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for gout. And its qualities are that the patient restricts his neck by twisting it until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and hold firm with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then bind the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and never again open it with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not proper that the flames be too thick; and heal across because the bone is close, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and to the cheek, and to the temple, and to the corner of the eye, and to the ailments of the face; and the qualities of their blood are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with any linen, as before; then the vein is drained, and whether the vein is through a short, long, or wide flame, because there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it on cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for sore throat, and for diseases of the face, like migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old. And the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his collar, then he strains his nose to your left hand, and takes the fine long flame, and puts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well until now, and the sinews begin to correct; and do not go too deep, and make a correction of blood according to your need, then bind it at night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the II veins helps in the treatment of  the armpit, and in the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and pestilence, and corrosion, and herpes, and smallpox; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck under both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the sick person, and the sick person sitting on the seat, then open the vein in a long one a little widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much as is necessary; then redo another part in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and tighten the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him until morning, that the wound may be healed.  
de la sainie des leivres	of the veins of the books 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of veins of the lips above helps in the ulcer in the mouth, and the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: cut therefore both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and just as well the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The vein of the veins that are below the tongue so help after the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is to the constriction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bleeding is that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and look below on each side a vein black: bleed then one and the other, and do not go too far into them, for under there are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut, which are commonly opened in two ways: either pricking with a sharp instrument all along the vein's course; or with a subtle olive as trenchant knives, and it is called "anvil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and depth of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is need to open the veins that are full of gross blood apparent, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:  
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and at the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it befits the patient to bleed wisely, and that he should avoid the artery which is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he feels the ground, and blood flows out, then it should be stanched as I have said; and the flame should not prick but cut like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it behooves you to constrain it, and change another; or you desire no vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein removed from the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cup at the flame is healed, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is fitting that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse; then sign the place with a fire brand, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flaming needle; and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: escape therefore. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up like the urine of a child, and the vein is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: haste yourself therefore, and put your hand above lengthwise, then remove your hand if the vein is still, as often happens; bind his arm, and leave him so, and do not move him, the patient; and be without fear, and do not move him until he is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if his arm is not set straight, and he feels pain, and the medicine is not present, then tie off the artery if it opens up, because the head of the retraction; and set the arm straight.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a strip of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half and tie it well until the other day; if it does not hurt, that is good; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping is not harmful in more positions for the small wound, and the strength of the band on the arm.  
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle is helped so that it draws blood from the top of the head and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it behoves the surgeon to place himself toward the nerve which is below, and if he does not pierce too deeply, and finds the nerve, and he swells and the health is grazed, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then it behooves you to feel the vein with the aneth instrument; and touch the nerve with your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision along the length
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and helps the eyes; it is necessary to bleed in the olive branch or the myrtle branch, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has no tendon, nerve or artery.  
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest position, and do not worry if it takes the first time, and you begin again; and by chance some men swell the joints at times when one attempts the first time, but it does nothing harm. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The qualities of the vein are according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting, if it is brought only to maintain health, and to avoid diseases to come; and let the blood be drawn in one of the III veins that are or course: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and it should be done at the beginning of Lent on Monday, and in Autumn and Winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it should be done the first day or the third, after II hours or III days.  
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting which is administered to illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times; and it does not behoove to bleed children until XIV years, nor woman carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not bleed the old man who has passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some wants to be bled, in whatever manner that may be, it is fitting that he prepare the intestines with a light enema, if he has much mucus retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities of waste harmful to the principal members; nor should one bleed anyone who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as it is known; nor hydrops; and worse to bleed after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, watching and fasting, and that which all virtue, or by means of the weapon or of the body; then subtilize the humors, if his blood is thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have the power to do so; then go into a bath, if nothing prevents you, to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein at the side below the armpit, as we have said; and guard yourself that day from work, from exertion, from lust, and similar things; and be quiet and joyous, and let the one who bleeds be higher than he who is being bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then restrain the thread above the middle, for when it is too loose or tight, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; then moisten the one being bled with a drop of old oil, then put his finger from his left hand on that vein below the point where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not become too open and easily pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that are as thick as cords in the groin, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts fire to them, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some; and if one opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, for this reason, therefore, it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.  
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is worked on the first time, it is good; if not, he begins again a little below where it was, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let him rest for one or two days, and do not bind up his arm: for fear there will come a boil; nor enter into bath, then begin the discharge if he wishes; and if the puncture is small, or the vein short subtle, and you doubt that it does not contain so much blood as you see, then prick in the same place to the whole flame directly; and work a little, so that the limb be swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place wounded, do not begin the bloodletting again, and put on a bit of oil, because it closes the body of the blood, and is mixed in this place the oil that the wound; and thus administer the oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the course of blood; and this same thing does trickle and bow of it, when one puts it on the place; so subtly the blood and it parts when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess that is large, which happens often, even when it is drained only once and the opening of the vein is small, so hasten, and place on top a sponge moistened in water and salt a little hot, and restrain it for one hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place afterwards for several days, without any blackening or greening, then it does not harm him; and if you see, place on top anything of aloes or myrrh put in juice of calament, monstastre, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearance to the basilica's  health: put therefore your hand on, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore that you put on anything of those we have said, for by chance it may lack the artery; but let him I bandage I plaster dry to harden the place, then its care other care, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is plump and full, and has need of bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and that the flames be wide; and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little and often, and he must be bled by cutting crosswise, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and is more useful than bleeding long or wide.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to one whose body is weak from blood loss, it is necessary to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, treat him with blood three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, mix soft bread before the wound with mucid syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pulses at the vein, after the exit of much blood, then it behooves him to moisten broth of flesh and fragrant syrup and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the opening of veins. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm, and bleed other times, if it is needed, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to empty his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed from another part, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already hot and causes fever; so it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will drip in pieces; then when you have treated all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his arm when he is healthy, that death does not come in place of pieces, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it is not necessary when you see to loosen his arm, and let blood a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on it; nor if it is curved, that he extends his arm widely, for that would be bad; but let him rest as much as he is healthy the second time; or you put it to the point of the flame, until the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on top a little piece of wool set in water, and press lightly. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein in the neck because it is composed there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red; then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then drain it now through, neither wide nor long; and let the openings be wide, and drained well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot pull it out, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood there in the water until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer; and the vein of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.  
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: restrain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if you can see it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it completely through, it does not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are below all covered with skin, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on top of the vein to keep it covered tightly, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sap of the sophene is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and hips and old legs, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his medicine is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it throbs, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins; so heal where the larger vein, or at the ankle, that is better. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it above the foot, guard the nerves which are below, and cut in a way similar to when cutting into [something]; and let the flame be annealed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot flow out, put the foot back in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first time the wound fails, recommence the second one above a little, because the place is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the soap from the other foot equally.  
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its bleeding is good for the pain in the hip, when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its vein are that the patient enters into the bath, and strains above the ankle four fingers by twisting it, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you cleanse it in all the ways that you can, and across; and it is better that you make it open than that you cut it, because the skin is dry, and it is much replenished at men's hands.  
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, see that there is no pain in the one who opens or the back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard the nerves; and make as much correction of blood as you see, and then untie the tie, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of ventosa wounds 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and leeching is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is felt to hurt so much is according to II manners: or it is with fire, or without fire; and cupping that is done by striking and extracting blood is done in XIIII leus of the body, of which one is all in the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others in II ribs of the neck; and the ventouse below the chin; and the ventouse of II shoulders; and the ventouse above the hips; and the ventouses between II arms; and the ventouses of II legs; and the ventouses of II ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken one as much as when one makes bloodletting from a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or by custom, we must bring them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time; for there are such who, when they have need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who feel fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness to their eyes; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and leak blood; and there are those who dream, and see through blood and nightmares and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed after.iii. hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the head helps in the great pain of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this cupping is in place of the cephalic bloodletting, and it is not fitting for him who is of cold complexion to use it, or who has catarrh, for this does them great discomfort; and for this reason, it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those who have or head colds diseases.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windpipe is in the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for that reason it is good for the treatment of pain, and for the opening of the channel of the throat, and all, and for repletion; and one should not block it too much, because if it is held too firmly, it creates an obstruction in the stomach or heart.  
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The punctures of the II ribs of the neck are worth as much as pains in the head, and in the ophthalmia and migraines, and in the strangling, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the basilary vein; and it is necessary that you command the healer that he express his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not come a hemorrhage. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilations below the chin are good for mouth disease, and gum rot, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The bleeding of the veins with a knife is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to put too much pressure on them, because their skin is bare of flesh, and lies over nerves and arteries.  
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup which is on the haunches is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it should be large, and of iron, that it has need to well draw; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break; and in this way it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the tumors; and they are placed in the place of the two calves, and of the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed temperately, and place it firmly, and move it equally, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are such who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce it twice: the first time to thin the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to pierce it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, let us often return to it; and if the vein is strong, then we pierce it well, and the ends are that the veins be pierced soundly, and it is necessary for him who has thick skin and hard, and who have porous pores, that you oil their places with suction cups of appetizing and dissolving oil: If it is in winter, of violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or seed oil of gourd; and if it is in summer, of cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm, or dill seed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom one heals has tender skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on it, but one should wash it after the ventosaion of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or something similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from rosemary water, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities raise themselves from old wine, or from seuc water, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not fitting to bleed with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or II; and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he lie down when he must be cupped and when he is cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are recovering are choleric, and if their skin is too much agitated and inflamed; then it befits them to eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce at the meal, and similar things; and suck milk, and meat of roasted pig, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mints, and  mince rue and small parsley and sparrows; and the day that he will be bled, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men no times triacle or muscate before or after bleeding, to comfort the main limbs; and let it be subtle the root, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hips and the hip joint, because these parts do not suffer to be hurt on their own, and one does it only in order to draw blood from limb to limb, as we put them on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the groin to diminish the limb; and to remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or a stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the thigh when there is held-back windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and some times filled with warm water, as in maladies of pleurisy, and in such a manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for this. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it shall have two sides of a width and half a palm from the forefront, and have or cost on the side near the middle, as for putting a needle, and be of iron, so that it does not blister the patient when placed upon the limb; and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a heated candle into, and they should be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the suction cups of children are other than old people, and the thin than the fat. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus put this suction cup on the limb:  take the wick of wax or linen, and place it in the suction cup through the hole that is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and the dressings should be on the puncture that we have said, so that when one wants, vapor goes in, and you take off the suction cup; and take the wick as before, and restart it often, if you need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in illness of pleuresin, on all sharp pain, has no handle nor piercing, and is administered only when it is full of water, and is put upon the member only so much; and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leech wounds are introduced only in members where one cannot put suction cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in their denuded flesh, such as two or three, and others similar; and the qualities of the user is that when you find leeches that are in sweet water nets without purgation, if you take them; and put them one nut in sweet water, until they are famished, and have nothing in their bellies; and then it should be healed by vein and suction cup, then rub the member so much as it is red, and put on the leeches; and when they will be full, and fall off, if it is their place where one can put a suction cup, then put it, because it is worth much afterward. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not done, lift the place of ease, and then with water, well, and then the strained. And if the place heals too much after the body of the wounds, moisten the linen cloth in cold water and put on top, as long as the wound is stretched; and if the wounds are multiplied, put on top crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is stretched; or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them as long as they dry on the place, so now will it stop; and if you need more, take other wounds. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sinuses do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle there until the sinuses are open, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden; and when you see that they are bleeding, powder it with a little aloes and thyme crushed, or ash, they will now fall.  
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the fool who does not read from this chapter will never see anything from the ancient books, nor will he have read any of them; and for this reason, the science is estranged in our land, because I have never found anyone good; and I know nothing, except through the knowledge of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have shown you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if any thing does not allow it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if his tension is not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold dishes, and meat of hare and lamb, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; so the patient returns to his first government that he has used.  
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or he has viscosity, like wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this nourishment they recover strength and more quickly the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones broken of the old and the decrepit do not well reunite or weld according to their nature for the dryness of the limbs, nor also those who are too tender, like the bones of little children; but make no cure, reset upon the broken bone the gross tendons which hold together and join the limb together, as long as it enforces as it was before; and not the least point of its work, and for this it is necessary to nourish them with thick meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the outside and others inward, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with fracture, and fracture to a small split all.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner has its engine and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by that which its parts are twisted, and it appears well by outside, and feels at the pressing of the hand; and when there is no torsion nor feel upon touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no fracture; but it may well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not advisable to move it with your hand, but apply the medications that come after here, and then restrain it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in a bow, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that abscesses do not come; and if abscesses come, let him leave none for a day, until the abscess is quieted; then set it equal to the measure that you can easily and sagely, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of him who has pieces; then restrain, as it is necessary afterwards. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in pieces, it is from two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and to your hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are freed, you straighten by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is drawn beautifully and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscesses hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient that he not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and watch well that the limb be so assured that he feel no pain.  
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except at the point, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain; and keep that he be put straight, so that tortuosity may not come when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in bigness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole great limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap; then bind light splints, III tours or IIII according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on the whole bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture then moves away a bit from the fracture; and soften the bandage bit by bit, until you reach most of the healthy part, then take the other splint, and turn it back upright on the fractured part; then return to the lower part of the fracture, and tighten it moderately, neither too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above; then put between the bandages splints of linen or cloth, until they are all equal, then tie everything from above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on top a soothing thing for the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days; then strain on your temples, and be half an inch wide carefully cut, or from wood from which one makes the staffs, or from palm branches, and be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it suits the limb in size or grandeur; then tighten on the splints as you have done at the first hour, then bind above with a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; tighter is on top, less; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, not too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I want to do works from the fools who make their splints with cords of twisted flax, and this is a great error, because the splint cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it does not behoove that between each splint there be less than two fingers' width of space. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is chafed by the stitches after the tightening in their health, then put underneath them wadding of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I shall say its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to straighten all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put splints for after V days or VII, or more according to your surety of the abscess happening; and see here the manner of the old plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take of flour that holds itself to the walls of the mill, and you confis it with abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and even to women and to small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take  three parts each of abarris, ladani, enula, asafoetida and gum arabic, and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into a powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is good for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of emplasters that is good for torsion: take mugwort and viscidum, ana 10; mirr and aloes, ana 9; acaice 6; bolic armenic 10, and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of emplastering joints and bones dislocated from their places, and calming the pain occurring, and the size used of bone, and the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in water and oil cooked, and put it upon the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removes pain properly. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaister for the restoration of broken bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, one part each; and grind it, and confit with wine, and if the limb is chilled, confit it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of setting more forcefully than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balsam, melilot, and sneezeweed, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb for restoration other than what is made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little hot, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of making a plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and chaff of sheep's wool cut, or feathers of eyes, and marsh mallow, and seal evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then after a while, untie it carefully and watch that the patient feels no pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; if not, do not untie it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, hurry, and untie it and remove the bandage now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of moist sea water, and dip in water, and raise the area, until the itching ceases and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie over it a nut, as long as you are sure of a warm abscess; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin again the subtle bandage, and a little of the bandage, and do not restrain it as tightly as before; and continue until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and pain and swelling are completely gone, and you need plaster and bandage, then begin again as you did first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, if it is not untied after III days or IIII or V or VII; and no time leaves XX days, according to what one sees, as long as the fracture heals, and approaches the joining of the bone above; then you restrain it more than before, and the fat thickens its flesh, as I said before; and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; arose then of warm water bathe, all the time that you untie it, and this be every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; by this work therefore shortens the inflammation of the limb, and repairs quickly what do the foolish mire, who keep the limb twisted: this is bad, and so is works fearful, and I see nothing else than to leave it and work it straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fractures and diverse figures, and the causes are determined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the place which is below the bone, like it is done with a haiche or a staff; and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impact embedded, or a fissure or of the neck of the bone, or of the head on the bone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture passing, which approaches to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is either great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound which is put back into the bone as subtly as a thread, and is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called 'capillary'; and if the wound which is made either by striking with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of the bone down, and is the leus like how make the blacksmith when it forge on the cauldrons; so enters the stone within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or whose bones are moist, such as children's heads; and it happens in all these ways of breakage that small pieces are dislodged from them like stars; and I will speak of them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by the subtraction on them, and the inquiry at tents, and by the rotten flesh which is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the capillary blood vessel is known by this: when one has discovered the bone and rubs it, black breakage appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the sick person, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever ague, and the eyes being watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unfavorable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it behooves to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone may not rot, and come the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the cloth that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and it is that you prick the head of the patient carefully, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess applies, help him with what he needs, and it is that you fill the place with soft cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess applied is calmed, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut along a narrow strip in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp at one end, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so that you do not pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is broken and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it through, so that you administer splints with tarteres, not too deeply so that they do not go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or circle, that does not let pass the point beyond the bone; and you should have more than one, so that each comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have splints for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of tarretes:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the broken bone is that you put one tarrete on the bone, and turn to your two until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the tarere back in another place a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tweezers, pliers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, it is necessary that you reset the pointed tool which is lodged from the bone to all other instruments seeming to a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more hardened and more subtle than the other scalpel; and if it remains nothing of the little bones, or no scales, then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.  
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is this one that Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone where the broken part appears, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lentil-shaped incisional instrument, for this is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the part be sharp in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath; if it is attached to the bone, gently remove it, because it is removed well without pain, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble that sprain, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, so as to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with large razors, and then smaller ones after that, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary and subtle cuts, it is necessary that you administer care according to its location; and this thing is not well-answered by him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, that you do not hurt the wound; then administer above a bandage, and do not constrain it more than so that it holds the wound only; and let it be like that for a day or two, until the pus has calmed down; then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and poppy flour, and incense powder, and wormwood, and similar things; and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer additional unctionless medicines; and guard that the wound is always clean, that you do not leave any ointment, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the brain tissue, it corrupts and harms, and brings great evil to the patient; because when one puts a pungent thing on the wound, it stings upwards.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take guard then, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so is it doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blackening does not come forth except for the medicine that has been put on it, which it has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and III parts of rose oil, and glue I cloth, and put it on the sore; then cure it in ways of cures that are fitting, until it be healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the two bones above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or pierced through the nails, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and to the pouch outward, until the nails return according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the leg and the bone cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of two parts, make another one like it, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed, then bind to the head with two layers of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bandage one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the leg.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the preparation of aubun from an egg, and powdered with millet; then let the tent remain, until the bones are hard, and the cartilages hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if so, a single piece of cloth is draped over, and the bandage stays put, and it blows on the patient; do whatever you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the new while you are working on it, then put a cloth or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a teaspoon of diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come, if you put a poultice from afar, of sesame flour, and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light compresses on top, and do not bind it at all; and if the break of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments to that, then sew the crack, and cure it with things bringing flesh, and soldering, as are poultices and ointments suitable to that; and if inside there is no wound whatsoever, then cure it with tents, and put twigs of splint inside, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken below, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so much, and is not broken in two, except for the cartilage inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from the right hand, and push the fracture inward lightly, and hold it with the other hand outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is dislocated into two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a break, then restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cerote, and place on it one double drapel; and place on the drapel a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and put a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or flaxseed flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put a light linen cloth over the plaster, and if the plasters dries, and the patient’s disposition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward none of the bone pieces are removed; so subtly remove them with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none remaining, then close the wound if it is wide, and put on one suitable plaster for this purpose, to prevent flesh from forming, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be as large as your need; and gently lift the bone, and tighten the ball with your hand, so that you put each fracture together as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps out by force because it comes embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back, and put under the shoulder one oreillier in the middle, and push the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the forceps is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two [hands], and if you find it shattered, then it is necessary that you split it up; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any elevation, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the forceps this instrument, to guard the syfac.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems like a spoon, and is not hollow, and be as wide as it is convenient, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have it two ends, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as it is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, so cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The straining of the bone, when it is sensed in wounds and in incisions, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of mill and of yolk of egg, and put light compresses on top, and put a spear under the saddle, if you have need of it; then take a very broad band of a palm wide, then put the double drape on top of the compresses, and the plaster; then take a thin strip of III fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage up on the neck, and under the good saddle, and under the bad saddle; and tighten each side, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, so you reinforce it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then you restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the saddle, to raise the shoulder up; so will lighten the fracture of the force by the elevation of the shoulder, or you bind his arm to the neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come to it, until XX days; then restart the plaster, if you see that he has need of it, and restrain and leave it as it is, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most within XXVIII days, and in less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or dislocates in its middle and only feels it by touch; so, according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put above a double cloth; then put above a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is rough anywhere on the shoulder, so take that roughness of linen bandages, so that the splint rests evenly; and then restrain it with a very tight bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the limb every day; and all times that it softens, so restrain it, and put back in place the splint if it is out of place, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25, and when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not a bone that easily moves out of place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out ahead and not under the heart, so do it above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the arm to soothe abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, so it declines to the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and weakness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the veins on the broken bone, and he smells good. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and put one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and he brings the sides of the two bones together with your hands, and carefully try to set them in every way as much as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the fine skin, or a light cloth such as gauze, and wrap it in one bandage, and tie it above the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the band around to the back, and tighten it evenly, and reward each hour the patient’s limb, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to untie it, because of corrosion or itching which comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and wipe the plaster away, and treat what has come there in ways of cure; then put back the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only for that reason because they are brittle; and one feels it well upon inquiry to both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put the fracture equal, as it is fitting. 
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwards, the patient feels very great pain and sharp pain, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pricks the membrane; and besides pains, and coughs and vomits a large planty of blood, and it is of grievous health, and the ancients have placed great importance upon it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to drive out the wind.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not yet come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of us put suction cups on the place to suck out fluid, and that seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cups draw out the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said to you of which one must cover the place with soft wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the layer around, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain which he cannot endure from the bone that pierces the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under it an instrument to guard the skin; and afterwards one must saw through the bone, and scrape gently, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on it soft cloths in rose oil, and put on the top; and care while the place of this one that it befits the abscess, and lie sideways on his side where it should be, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are pulled and held, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one takes care of it. 
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take ward if the limbs are softened, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on the back there is a sauteness and egestion without will; and when one has laid it on its stomach, there is an egestion without will.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and wants to sit up, it cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; if he does not labor in its care. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reheat it if there is an abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is soothed; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure it with ointment that promotes healing, until it is well; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", then you put your fist of your left hand in there, and put it equal to the other hand as best you can, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do this again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is well.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there should have been a little weakening at the top; and it is made long, and slopes to the outside, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and numbness, and swells that which breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, then put equal the fracture, until it is to natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inwards, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it equal, put it on the plate, then put on a piece of staff or of wood, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and employ the place below the ribs until the wound is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses come to those [areas], do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends to two ropes, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on one seat; then put the broken arm onto the stick as far as it comes to the armpit, and make a curvature of the stick in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downwards; then put the patient's arms together with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below by one rope, and extend each to his side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, restrain the linen under the fracture and on top of the fracture, and extend each minister to its side. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one linen strip under the armpit and the other towards the back, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the back, it is necessary to put the linen strap lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top and bottom; then set the fracture equally as it is necessary, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess happens to come, do not hold it back for up to seven days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in oil of roses, until the abscess is appeased; then hold it back, and the manner of holding it back is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and hold back on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place, unless anything prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three widths on each side; then hold back on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in removing.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heats up, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bandage, that itch nor swelling does not come to the place, or the irritation may not come to the limb for that reason because it is too much inflamed. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, he should not untie it until after III days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or is not softened the ties; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put, in such a manner that the food is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, it should be gross.  
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days after all; and then one must untie it and administer baths and medicines for healing so that the place heals. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and congested, it remains to untie for one or two months. 
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fossil», because one is small, and that is the one that follows the socket; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the small thigh; by chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small one, and by chance andui together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone which is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and set straight. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, it is necessary to pull more strongly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and be the patient crossed upon him-self, and the cushion before him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers' arm to the part below his hand, or at the joint, and one other minister on the other above.  
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirrors equal, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture the pieces are broken, then place each one in its place, and if any are detached that prick the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoring there comes boils, then glue a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the bandage above subtly, until the boils are calmed. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the surgeon removes the cerote, and he puts the plaster of the powder of the mill with an abundance of egg, then puts the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more outwards, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more ways: either if the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and hold more above the fracture than elsewhere, and all days less far away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on top of the splint be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, by which it is bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itch is appeased; and let the limb not be too much at rest.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommences the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it so for some days, until the numbing comes, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not release him until twenty days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or whoever has this injury, then he puts his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.  
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at our two bones there are few fractures, and they come only with many folds.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it behooves the patient to sit crossed-legged and straight in front of him; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the minister's broken bones, and place them equally, as much as they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come; then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the bottom near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; then strap it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of heartwood as big as the palm of the hand, and strap it, as much as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and make the bandage between the two tight.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two [arms], if it is a dislocation, put it straight, as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, such as in the index finger or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the sound bone which is after; or you tie them together in one [bandage], whichever is best, or put on a splint above, like a poultice; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and cure those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus made: one above the fracture, and one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their limb to its side equally; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one bond should be toward the groin, and the other bonds below the fracture.  
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then let the ligaments be below the knee, and let the extension be below; then place the mire the bone even with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.  
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it be appeased then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you encircle the fracture with a stiff bandage doubled in II or III, and keep the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put I long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and lead the head of the thread upwards; then turn up the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then use the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloth soft to put equal tightening, then begin to tie firmly III or IIII turns on the fracture; and the more you go upwards from the fracture, and the less tighten it; then take hold of the II joints of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie III splints which are above, then return downwards to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there comes no abscess or inflammation or any other appearance. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, untie it and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it behooves to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it behooves to cut the place open and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the hip broken thus if one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in this restoration thus made, the patient does not feel pain at all.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the rue of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer but a fissure, or opening, and it has to all wound, and without wound, and it is well felt by everyone.  
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is as follows: one puts it even that which is rounded to its sides, as long as it is assembled move; then put the splint, and there you put a round steel, if you need it, and restrain it as it befits, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other fractures, such as a hot poultice and similar things; so put at each accident what befits it, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and there are all fractures as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in every way. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the bone called 'subtilz' is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns under.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints equally; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.  
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of woven rope that encompass the leg on one side and the other, and be of the length of the leg from the knee down below; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and bind it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not be able to incline to the right or to the left, and thus is well; and no one administers one stick along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and place it on the leg to ward off movement, and properly this is made in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, in order to see if there is an abscess hot or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come never a fracture and to two pock, and there have been only certain in more dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there come the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to go, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places; then put the plaster and bandages on top, and under the belly of the foot a small board a .ij. palms wide, then restrain the foot firmly, and when you have wrapped it in cloths and other things which you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, untie the ligature, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one finger width wider, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and strain it well. And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it be standing on the head of the table above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have said; and secure each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, so let it sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and be held behind; then fill the basin of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as the stomach; then turn the woman over, and lift her back up and down, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stomach; and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and so do for VII days or around: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder from a lamb, and tie a cane to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the cane form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and let it so for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; and are not hidden these fractures near to him who puts his study and his use into it, and attends my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For a fracture, it signifies more ways of restoration: therefore listen.  
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken branch, take a goose's throat and put it in the branch; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then keep applying a dressing of vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then immediately resume restoring the fracture that same hour or that same day, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess forms, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is quieted, and do not touch it for the third or fourth days, because you would cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to place it lightly with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions is not ready for you to put it even with your hands, then take the instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. digits or .viij. long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the smith that he imprints .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and one pock thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and let it be acute at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which the head of the bone should be placed on top of the visible bone; and the push at once, as long as it returns, and be equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, until the instruments have purchase. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then clean that which is remaining in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If do so much that it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black spiced wine, and properly this is how it should be; and do not put anything on top of the wound, whether a bandage or another thing where it has oil, lest it cause rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times fools have done this and brought upon the patient either death or corrosion at any time; and be the strappings softer and more lenient than those of other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the wound swelling, remove what you have put on top of it with all wine and put ointment for healing wounds on it, such as ointment tetra-fashion and similar. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be pulled apart in such a manner that the bone goes down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if each day passes, and it cannot heal but goes back in bone, you know that there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you cover the wound with a cloth tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it behooves you to cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar parts of the large limbs, do not set it, because many times death comes from it.  But leave it until it purrifies; perhaps it will join by itself after twenty days or thirty, then heal the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see is the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot do the member its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take ward then if it is fresh: if he administers medicinal astringents like aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acai, and similar things, in the same way that you pick any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with egg white or with basil; and put them on the knot in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not release it in hands for days; and then loosen it, and begin another one, as long as the knots are removed; or you constrain it on a piece of wood well made; because the properties of wood is that it removes all the swellings from the members; and if the knot has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you raise it with any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored, and afterward the limb remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to the nursing of the member; or for multitude of dressings; or for too great movements, not at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and ease; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great nursing, and the dressing often of water teed, until the nursing comes to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodules and the torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilote, and similar things; and make i. a softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the viscous of vismalve, and you cook it with the fat of geline or oil of sisament, and make a plaster on top; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with chaff of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes is removed the dislocation by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And give a movement to the limb each hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the distortion is old and hardened, like stone, and need be removed with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle incision lightly; and put cussons and study into the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation comes from a joint leaving its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to any, if it should now be returned without bracing.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Car if one delays, the limb swells and perhaps when it is reset it causes pain to him; for this reason it does not behoove one to move it at the hour that it is swollen; many times brings it sprain and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave him until the abscesses are all calmed; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as it comes in its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by more than one disposition.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, it is necessary that you set it gently, and do not scold; and in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his fingers in the pocket of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it even; and command the patient that he soften them, his mandibles, and move them in all directions.  
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the minister puts it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back broken, even if it is the two mandibles together, put them in hot water and oil until you gently reset them; do not neglect bringing it back together as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with softened, he puts on cloths moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then binds him lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he try to yawn, but eats light food as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed; then chew what he wants lightly, and do not try to open his mouth to eat or drink, as long as the jaw is well healed and sound. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed sores come, and perhaps a rupture of the belly, and perhaps a vomiting of clear phlegm.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many times die those who have it, within 8 days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The lever cannot dislocate from within the side of it and of the bone, and is dislocated only once outside, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies sound on his back, and stretches his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain him; and the head which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if perchance, and if it dislocates any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain him, and command the patient to rest until he be healed; and in the same way is brought back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it is dislocated to the side towards the hip; and the second is to the side towards the breast; and perhaps it is dislocated upwards, and this happens little; and it does not dislocate backwards towards the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inwards towards the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the hip, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it goes easily; in those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.  
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps in some men there happens a percussion or fracture, and it inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, it is necessary that you examine it carefully until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocation when it is pulled towards the socket, and puts a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place, nor move from any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly when touched; and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise brought back, when it is new, or if the child is ill. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their hands under the seat, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it down; so it will come back gently.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer him softly mollifying and soothing, as decoction of althea and fennel and melilot in water, and let it be administered; then lay the patient on his back, and put under the buttock a piece of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of his foot on the wool, and raise the head of the shoulder with skill, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it according to this manner: and that you make a man present who is larger than the patient; and let him be straight towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the buttock of the patient, and raise the buttock up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so he can't carry anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.  
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And you can also reset it in another manner: and take a long stick of wood placed as the post, and neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but he must have a cover above him, and the patient should be standing on the long part of the stick; then extend his hand to the other side, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick from both arms wide and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter through the hole under the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie above the chief of the staff drapes below, that the staff does not pierce the patient, then put it under the assle of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the auxiliary on the staff, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm upon i. eschillon of a ladder of the wide, and be stretched his hands down, and be let the body hanging from the other part: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the assale a sphere of wool even, then put the emplastrum sprinkled with powder of the mill, with incense and aubun of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the assale carefully, and turn the linen on the emplastrum, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal more quickly; and then move more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery to 3 places as it is described in front of this chapter of cauteries.   
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all these things, and it unties after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure as long as it is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient to bathe many times, until that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated in places, and returns to places; and it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because it can be seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the blade of the patient with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as an abscess would come; because if it were to come from an abscess, it would be painful to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back at all, even when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is like this, when it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms are spread, and the hands do look according to the knife around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm at the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then when you have enveloped a long and wide double cloth; and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then puts the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in place, put dry plaster on it with egg yolk, and strain it firmly, and support the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then untie it.  
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, he unties the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, you begin the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it thus for several days, until it is firmly placed; then unties it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe him and rub him well, and press until it is eased; or you put on the joint a sheepskin filled with fat, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the sheepskin, and then enter the bath; and so do it two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see that, put on a fleece of moist heated with butter, and strain it on; it will return to its place. 
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the place does not swell, or that there comes a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the bringing back is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he puts it even, so that it puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns entirely; it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the sick person’s back of their hand on a table at extension and bringing back.  
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, the patient puts the back of his hand on the table, and the healer puts his hand over the appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and harms nothing to the patient except that as long as the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; so there is no other means except to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then soak it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the hips of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the joints of the hand are dislocated to each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the belly; then are the joint and put the dislocation at your pouches until it comes back, then support the head of the joint, and the bend toward the part where it is disjointed; and let it be two days, and then set it straight each day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it each day, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and also do so, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do so, when it is dislocated from another part. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the limbs jump away involuntarily, and cannot be held, and many times are softened any limb, or the two thighs or the two arms or one. And many times the spine moves in four parts; the one which moves to the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure of this is that you reward oneself if the gilbositez comes from childhood: if it has no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by grand words, where it has not in all great profit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the inflammation that comes to the breast before, there is nothing or health; and also the one that comes straight on II sides, and it cannot be cured otherwise than the one properly coming on the back, as I said; and that the patient is stretched on his face in a straight line, and has a strain below him, so he does not move; then put the stick at the head into the earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a rope between the arms of the sick person, and the other at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers tighten the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the II sticks; and they are well fastened, the stick as we said, and the priest puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three braccia long, and place it under the armpit, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the armpit, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with a turning that turns by hand.  
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And that you put II  sticks to the head of the patient of an arm of great, and towards the feet II others, and have between each stick, up and down, a palm's width of long; and have in each stick I hole, where the string goes, and be the sticks firmly in the earth so that they do not move; and between each II sticks have I turning stick, for which the thread turns, and have in II turning II small sticks of a palm long, to turn the turning; and then tie the string that is among the handles to the turning towards the head, and the other string towards the feet to the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning to the whole string, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equal, put a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three two of long, that covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed; and if any thing comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and they think that this is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, therefore one should not have presumption: perhaps it would bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only through dislocations, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and a little dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick person than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double his knee to the fire; and is the part which is below swollen with hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes in fever, is that this accident is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and he retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee nor bend it, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and his groin is softened, and the head of the hip bone is in its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you regard whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no need for cure; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of .iiij. manners of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has no need of other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must appear as the minister strong, and hold the leg strong with two hands, or at the limb that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands below his shoulders, then tightens with a linen cloth above the hip; and another holds the chief of the limb; and extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at one time, and remains suspended.  
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to take care of its appearance. When the dislocation is at the shoulder, you should put the patient on his healthy side, then place the linen on the base of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin and towards the force; then grab some other ministers with his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards in a straight line: now it will return to its place; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.  
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope over the two heels, and over the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two finger lengths more than the other; then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and let it be two arm lengths above the ground; then command the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient who embraces the hip tightly, for now the joint returns easily. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the rear, he lies the patient as we have said in the one who has glibosity, and restrains I liien upon the bad leg properly, and upon the foot also; then puts II sticks, I at the chief and I other at the feet, then puts I stick between the hips of the sick emmi the form; and ait planty of moist cloths around, that it does not bleed him the patient, then extends each minister toward him, and he sets the dislocation equal to his hand. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.  
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on a.i.e., table, and press him as we have said in the book of the chapter, and lie the patient on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the leg as much as possible and according to what I have said; and put his pain to be on the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and bring the end towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down or raise him up on the ground, but he must be as if the hip was dislocated outward, as we have said about the laying down on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the band stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table; and it will be in point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest III days or IV, then untie, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are equal, strain it, as before, and leave it III days; then untie, and allow it to go well, until the limb is strengthened. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not rest at his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his waist, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests gently his leg at his hip; and put the plaster on, and make the leg rest at the hip, and bind them together strongly for III days or IIII, then untie it; and do not let the patient work to go, as long as the limb is strengthened.  
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed. 
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels is sometimes sprained, and sometimes dislocated completely, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated; the reduction is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when it is only eased. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from the whole, you must have the patient sit straight, and hold him by the legs, above the ankle; then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, then up to the top, and push the foot well upward; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put the post firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie blankets around him so that he does not get cold; then hold the patient by the hip, and some other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the ligature, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the post should be well between the hips of the patient to keep the patient when he is extended; then put your hands on the dislocation, and some other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return easily.  
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is pointed, place the plaster and bandages on top, and strain them firmly, and bind his leg to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight; then leave him II days or III, and if the bandage softens, strain it again. Then unbind it after the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for IIII days; and if he goes before that time limit, it is not certain that he will not dislocate it again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to this place, then you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back of the foot, it behooves you to make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straightly, and put your foot on what opens of these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is equalized, and there is nothing open, so put under the sole of the foot a table at the shoulder, then constrain it firmly, and leave it for III days, then untie it; and make him rest, until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so be not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, nor bold; and use at the beginning of calming things abscess hot, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, so reset now the limb to its place, as well as the abscess heals there; and when the limb is in its place, administer calming things abscess hot, and cure the wound, as it befits, with dressings dry; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; and keep yourself from entering into a way of fear, according to what I have said, for this brings you death according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. 
Amen	Amen 
