O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange everywhere, so has the science perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of its force except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this have come error and vanity, and are closed the understandings and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Or it seems to me that I bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; 
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of the cautery, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to climb in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of joints, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of the hand.  
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, if he does not beware lest he fall into error and harm men;  
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	in such a way that I have seen many times more of those who interfere in this science and abandon themselves to their ignorance and lack of experiment. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I see a fool look at an abscess of scrofulous or the neck of a woman, and cuts the arteries in the neck. 
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.  
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I see another doctor treating a stone from a man's body, and the stone was large; 
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called for this treatment, and I see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it they would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I see another doctor taking care of the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctor, full of ignorance, forced the broken bone onto the wound, and did not put any lint on the wound, and left it like that. 
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded him not to unbind it at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and so remained until the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg;  
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I heard it dislocate, it was in peace and felt no pain.   
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But by all means the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it;  
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and did not cease the corruption to go through the member until the member was entirely lost.   
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another kind which breaks open the abscess and then inflames by the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not proper that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions:  
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, works where there is danger in many positions; 
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.   
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which reason it is necessary that you keep guard, so that the foolish ones may not speak badly of you. 
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the hopeful diseases to good health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galians says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take care of any bad illness, lest you be called a foolish one." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and cauteries of medicine sharp, and are the chapters ordered from the head to the feet; 
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the shapes of the instruments, and the tools of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; 
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and this chapter orders and the shapes of the instruments.  
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head to the foot, and the shapes of the instruments.  
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and of the annoyance of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and of nuisance, are the longest speech and subtle sciences and the secret answers; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of this speak most sages, and agree to this;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffice few their words, because I fear the length.  
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally to every complexion or it has matter, except for if there are two complexions. 
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.  
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have said and declared that cautery there is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others say the opposite. 
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is not worth for disease that comes from heat and dryness.  
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured for a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;  
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he who says the opposite states that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.  
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not interfere unless he who has proven it and knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the appearances and space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and wet diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the masters assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that fire cautery together with secrets of the treatments and more good than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the heat is simple, and does not come forth except to the member which is burnt, and does not harm another member besides that one.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The ardent medicines come from member to member by removing, and bring to the member diseases of bad healing. 
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And perhaps it harms the patient.  
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.  
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and was based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I keep from you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. 
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.  
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time cauteries should be made, and how long they are to be applied.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for this reason that the harms coming are diminished with the help of cautery; 
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot await the time that greater evil does not come to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not ever think, dear child, as the foolish ones do; 
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because to the illness which is cured by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, because cauteries are not just medicines that change the complexion, and dry up the humors that are the cause of pain, and are more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and of its power.  
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And a most important thing is that the disease often comes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the disease and its power. 
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And these excesses are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there are few excesses and moisture, such as cauteries of fire for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. 
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.  
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true.   
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine for those when we administer manners of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.  
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cautery of an instrument of gold is more effective than of iron, and they said this those who were learned because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance;  
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the lesions of cautery do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I have found that it is true in some men; 
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they said.  
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And anyway when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled; 
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much; 
si font au feu;	if done to fire;  
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough impediment. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery which we have seen useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter of the head down to the feet, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to make it by reason of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head as the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicinal solution modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can bear. 
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make an opening on the head of the patient.  
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your lap; 
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; 
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two fingers come together, if it bleeds then cauterize with the tool called 'olivare', because this is its form: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the spot marked with ink, and make as you descend and withdraw your hand slightly pulling back and forth turning it;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then gently move your hand slightly, and look at the place if you see the bone small. 
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, then restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. 
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After that take a piece of silk, and put in it soft and moist cotton, and put it on the place, and let it there for 3 days.  
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After that put on moist cotton in butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And let it there until the burning is gone.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed. 
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say the ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, the more it discharges.  
et por ce si aide mues.	And for this reason, they help to move it. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said any of these that one must let the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then sew up what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they say others that one should leave the cautery on so long, and put it down so strongly that one lowers the bone as wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors might come out moved.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound long open; 
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards one must cure and dress it.  
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all except in certain men where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I seem to myself that I should leave him; 
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members;  
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salutary and effective for me, and from this I operate in thus as a whole health.  
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and from purgation of the head and oils and plasters; 
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not effective.  
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take ward so that the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; 
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, cauterize there below with that cautery we have said above.  
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After do cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do cautery where it is called "vessels"; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put there those where one puts cupping glasses;  
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and alight your hand so that you cannot see up to the bone: 
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later;   
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:  
dou cautere dou chief	of cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the patient is purged by medicinal fumigations, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of the illnesses, and all of these do not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore I do cauteries according to two manners, that is to say of hot medicine and of fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries of hot medicine are such that you take a piece of lead and remove the rind and cut it into two pieces as big as your thumb, and then put the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the piece of lead under the skin. 
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it will be replaced, so tie and hold it well and leave it thus for twelve hours. 
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie it and treat the wound with lead, and leave the wound thus for two or three days. 
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put a poultice soaked in butter on top until it heals. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure of ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see such things done of certain medicines burning which I have written or do as I have treated burning medicines. 
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which here is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clasp or it has the point of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance. 
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and touch the iron lightly a little, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned.  
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows an abundance of blood. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton in a wad of silk, and put it on the place for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put cotton moistened in butter, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed. 
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare," at its whole point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient. 
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of the medicine and of iron do not help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and then reign so on the place ailing a line of half a finger of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; 
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard the jaw that it moves when one brings it up, and the nerve is not looked at except by the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against loss of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know about it, and who is not studying and experienced; 
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work be halfway done; 
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the sickness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; 
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; 
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.   
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one puts there opening of medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then take this cautery which is called "point," for this is the form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After, prick all around the ear of the sick person, or where the pain is felt in both, and move it a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to cut. 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and there are 10 points around each ear;  
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the place until it is healthy.  
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torments which must be cured by cautery are only those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; 
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make cautery to the appearances that come from dryness and  spasm of nerves.   
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torment that moves with phlegm of  eyes and purges of head and gargles, and it is not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a point  four fingers away from the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips; 
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery at the top of the ear above a finger below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery remain there as long as the middle of the heart is burned 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the scalpel that we have put in front, but it is a little finer and it is necessary for the blade to be a bit thicker; 
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing its place as I said before, until it is healed.  
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make IV cauteries:   
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	II on the II horns of the head, and I remove the head, and I put in the place that is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; 
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be cured as we have said before.  
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that make the brain swell up. 
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after the king has treated the head of the patient completely and he places on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written about or treated in the treatise of ointments. 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cautery: 
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.  
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is sound thus, well and good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, then make three cauteries of him in the middle of the head descending to the neck, and there should be one finger's breadth between each cautery. 
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it like the others, and if you see it is getting worse, and the patient is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is sound; 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olivare," as I have said before.  
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of herbs and what we have said before; 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After the king of the head of the sick person, then I make cautery on the head and under each horn, and in the back and III on the spine of the neck. 
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is suffering, and the illness is severe, then I make IV cauteries on the spine of the back.  
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let him until the pus of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After curing as long as it is healed, and be the cautery that is called "olivare" that we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic ones should not use fire cautery except that one who is phlegmatic, and it conviene first to modify the brain of herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from bad medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's a child who can't endure it, then I make gargles and chewing modifying the brain often with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king of his head in the middle, and I make I cautery according to what we have said before, and I cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. 
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, do the cautery subtly according to this manner.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then one cauterizes with those cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by reason of melancholy the superfluities are declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick man is moistened, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to that which is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After place the head of the patient; 
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making a linen pad well, as well as the circle, put it within the head. 
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient sits crossed-legged, and be held well on all sides;  
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the linen, take some old sheep butter and apply it. 
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And heat it to a fire moderately so that if one places it on, they can suffer it;  
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After removing the circle from within the head, and let it cool. 
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healed. 
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see cauterize him by making more points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery soothes the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then places moistened cotton in butter and goose fat.  
de l’awe des eulz	of the awing of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient a thing purifying the head, and keep him from all moisture, and let him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After, he commands him to put his head back, and has cautery placed within the head, and has two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one. 
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple. 
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And guard against the decrease of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then restrain it with such power as you have.  
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how to stop it. 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And at no time is cautery or a hot iron applied below the two bones behind.   
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beside the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And one sees that it is superfluous cold phlegm, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	With cautery I burn the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries where hair grows under the two bones. 
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it is needed more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with small cauteries.  
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three walnuts. 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After he has laid down his head, and you make cautery in the middle with olive oil cautery;  
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make II cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the II sores, one point below the cheeks.  
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it. 
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called “olivare”.
de coi ci est li forme:	of this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see so make II cauteries on the II sores as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.  
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to II manners: 
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.  
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your healthy condition;  
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as like as the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs; 
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put cotton moistened in egg white and  a bit of persimmon over the eye, then heat the cautery as follows: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After that cauterize on the figure that you have signed here and there many times, so that the hairs are burned in that place. 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Therefore lift your hand, and leave it so for III days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burn is gone; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment treatment until it is healed.  
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come, and the skin is softened then begin the cautery again on that same place, as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are cut off, cauterize them until the skin is raised to its natural place, and it be even, and do not prick the hair in the eye.  
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a shape of parchment like the leaf of myrtle. 
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and quicklime, of each a third, and grind them together well; 
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it hastily so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it over the eyes of the patient.  
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the patient holds in one eye only, then you must work in that one, and if in both eyes as well. 
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put under the eye cotton moistened in vinegar.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the shoulder of the sick person be in your healthy and put your knee showing on the medicine, and press it and its point all times that the sick person feels burning from the medicine, because he feels burning as well as fire. 
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine to your place.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning will be passed, so lift the place of awe, and reward yourself if you see the parchment raised as if it had been raised by constraint of fire or by incision; 
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not so, so put back more of the medicine on the place where the medicine did not work, as long as your works are equal, and your eyes set to point;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on cotton moistened in butter as long as the wound is wet, after cure the place of the ointment which is called 'diaphenis' and other, as long as it is healthy. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that part which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after curing it until it is healed; 
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:  
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constrictions; 
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be returned to him whose study is this art.  
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or tilt its head;  
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put moistened cotton in water of an egg or in the juice of parsley on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cautery which is as follows: 
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and is shaped at the head like the form of a quill feather, altogether so that it is the cautery; 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you wish, it shall be pointed from one head to the other, and if you wish, it shall also be like a tent; 
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nonetheless, this which is shaped is more useful for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After press the fistula if it is open, and dry out its matter 
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, so the work, and extract fiercely the core.  
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After put upon the hot heated cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where it touches above the eye, so that your hands do not make a mistake.  
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and it corrodes. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this is not done, restart the cautery again once, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for 3 days.  
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	afterward put on moistened cotton in butter, and treat with the ointment of desiccation until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on an acrid corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat according to what comes in this chapter.  
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Attend a fistula, and open its place; 
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	afterward put in the fissure one subtle camomile of which this is the form:   
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it to the quantity of 1/3 of a plum ;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and let the patient not move at all so that the melted plums do not run to his eye ;  
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine or ale: 
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The pimple if it is at its place in a fistula, and the healthy one by miraculous healing.  
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer purging to the nostril and bring the fistula back to the body of the nostril according to what is proper in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of the openings in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are wounds in lips which are called “hair”, and even in children’s lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds with those that we have said in the divisions, and the treatment is not beneficial, then use this small scalpel cautery according to this form.
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it carefully in those crevices until it comes just to the fountain; 
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward cure the place of cauterization until it is healed.  
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the tongue or in the cheek or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and erupted and is enclosed and becomes a fistula; 
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all:  
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; 
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after you cut or open the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes to the bottom of it, and in the last place; 
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or two, after the cure of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed. 
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if he is healed thus, it is good;  
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.  
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it is not effective, then put the head of the sick person in your hand;  
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery whose form will come here after in such a manner that you put a handle on the tooth;  
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put inside the heated cautery, and hold it so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; 
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lightly touch your hand and begin the cautery according to your will 
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it stay there for an hour and spit forcefully.  
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner the tooth that was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dry.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cauterization according to two ways: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery of butter and cautery of fire. 
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization of butter is such that you take butter from a churn and the end in a spoon of iron or steel;  
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it is cooled. 
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see so moistened wool and cotton in butter cold, put it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron above it until the heat comes to the end of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery by fire is such that you take a chain of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the flame does not come to the mouth of the sick person.  
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, according to its form which will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.  
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then rinse it. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you are able. 
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the chain: 
des scrophules	of scrofulous
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moistures, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the fire cautery as will be described later in the form, and have it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side. 
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess. 
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days. 
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And put on moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed. 
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care the place of ointment and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors dominate over the channels of the body, and also when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by dissolving medicines; 
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you have made the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not come as far as the throat, and burn only a little bit, but of the heart
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" for that is its form as we have it before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	of the boil
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and disease of the body are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is ancient, if you make two cautery on the fortlec in their veins; 
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery removes the lump between the two breasts; 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that is before said.  
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make cautery by pricking with the whole cautery that is called "poins" for whose form is before in the malady of the ears; 
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the "poins" be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches.  
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at III reins according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, for you make three cuts with it.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then it befits you to reset the dislocation first.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterward soothe the patient on his back and on his ribs; 
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after lift the heart which is inside the little one to the two of your left hand;  
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then scald the cautery that has two nerves like this whose form is: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and comes the figure of the cautery along with four cauteries; 
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so the figures of cauterization are six cauteries. 
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves: 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted upon this nerve for which there are VIII cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put the cautery over with powdered silk. 
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by long time until he is well fortified.  
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thickened part of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until it becomes altered to its complexion, and many catarrhs multiply in him, and the usual methods of treatment do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Of this afterward he makes three cauteries, I under the armpit of the hip by the quantity of a die, to all the cautery clavicle, and II cauteries outside the two ribs as long as the figures of the cauteries are at III angles, and have such spacing between one another that they are not joined together when they will rot.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be so well-formed that it grazes the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a cautery to be made in the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and reigning upon the stomach here at a point according to the quantity that you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called 'point'. 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When to the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is further removed from its natural complexion due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in divisions, and it does not help him if it is necessary that the patient be treated above his head;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign of this [III] cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the man's ribs come. 
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and have of space between each cautery the thickness of a finger. 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long of the body, and do not press too much your hand on all the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let be burned only the half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; 
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:  
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is so, you can cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the whole body dry;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let him not come near boiling water, for the skin is very delicate there, and you can see it. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the capsule, he feels a sharp pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this cure fails to work, it is necessary for the patient to be treated on his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then place a poultice over the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, so that it looks like this form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize the area with the cautery until the skin is burned, and it comes up to the size of a spica, so that the surrounding tissue is all gone.  
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed. 
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not fitting that of this cautery use none others than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured any time. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly work, and it seems to me always better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must do cauteries with the roots of aristolochia and in such manner:  
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you will be able to find, and whether it is dry, and as thick and as long as your thumbs.  
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and moisten it in oil, and imprint it in the fire, and cauterize with this cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and make small cauteries one by one descending in the part that is below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And make two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little. 
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And with the cautery remove the pain, and the other on the stomach, and between the two shoulders, and the two ribs of the side where the cautery is between the shoulders. 
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand at all, but make it open as if smelling.  
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no one used a cautery of fire resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess. 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And jumps outside the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.  
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse of that which we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are III ways of cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; 
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder.  
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is placed in the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and be the elevation that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.  
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After it brings out the two nerves inflamed until the hearts are pierced on the other side, and then drives out the cautery, and thus there will be four. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, so cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.  
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rot for long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for dropsy, except with the method called "ascending."
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the head, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in place of the breast; 
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cautery be near the side of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After let the cautery open for to ward off corruption long time, and do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery. 
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and will be together the II intentions with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows; 
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to those that it is here before put. 
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic and are full of  yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger. 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with it, thus tighten outside the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After, make on each leg two cauteries at the point of the calf. 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg. 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, so that the water drains out. 
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the curing of the other wounds that we have said.  
de la menoison	of the hand
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a flux of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of healing;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or cautery of the stomach, the cautery circulates. 
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And IV cauteries around the belly subtly to all the cautery clavicle subtly, and II cauteries on the hips. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit any, if you do cauteries: 
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below almecdate poc and poc in triangling, and I cautery below the belly II does. 
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face on I great cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and I other on the liver, and I other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle. 
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain open long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cure the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is called “thelul”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut flesh, carefully heat the cautery like a razor, and then place it all ablaze upon that flesh which is cut. 
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave it there as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood stops;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the cures of dressings beneficial until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on flesh, it will have more help. 
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes a certain illness that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula, and it is filled and hidden rot and moist corrupted, then the does prove to at once a tent subtle, and guard that thou knowest at once the tent how much it has of length.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heat the cautery like a razor and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thing went into it, and reheat the cautery until that flesh which is rotten be burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of its need; 
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and you guard against injuring nerves which are within there, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those forces but in their fleshy place, and think that she is not entirely perished. 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After the cure of the place as long as it is sound, and if the places are healed, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the places are completely sound. 
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and corrupting the bones at the bottom; 
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and they do not take a tablet from women, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery clamp that we have said before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a line, and it will be more helpful.  
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds back urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, on the right and on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a fist.  
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And I make the cautery outwards towards the back, where it is needed. 
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cautery be made according to the shape mentioned before. 
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, there is great pain: 
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore it is necessary that one make III cauteries around the head, as we have said or cautery of the bladder, and II cauteries behind the back 
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be cauterized, as we have said.  
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found the location of the viscus department, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip be within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.  
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, make III cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.  
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: 
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it behoves you to purge the patient of gross humors with foul pills, or other good-looking pills.  
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: 
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, some of which are such: 
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the prominence of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and wide, and have between each cautery space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;  
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	At times one does cauterize in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, so cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have before said in the dislocation of the hip;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make in such manner that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the spaces of the groin be seared. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner one does for sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes just to the thigh and leg, so you make II cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII fingers, to the left part one finger;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery be a knife, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.  
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or nearby, cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with a cautery called "points." 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, if he makes more.  
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization with a knife or circular cautery, and be well guarded in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery in so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more discomfort and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left them until the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach solution of which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the sage say in cauterization of the hip, because this is how it is done, make one like a nail and be at the head as thick as a thimble, or a little less, and be by entrechetses and from one entrechetres to the other with a space the quantity of a finger's joint; 
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the pliers be over two parts, and also be like nuts, and there be the iron forceps well made; 
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:  
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And be heated until it is all red and glowing hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned upon the healthy side;  
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And cauterize once the cautery is red-hot and let it three days; 
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; 
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment cure until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little because of its danger, and few see who use it; 
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which those who can suffer it, and where it applies to.  
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine burning is that you make the instrument between tweezers in which descends the margin of the door, and be of iron or of an appearance long, and in the height have two, and each one the quantity of the size of a coin.  
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And be open below and above, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put on the boil of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand over on the boil of the hip. 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After cast between the two circles of the hot fire which is heated to the fire, and let him for an hour of ten, and suffers the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there he finds healing as well as fire; 
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the healing is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip of soft wax, and leave thus for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is black from the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him stay III days while rot draws out of it 
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the care of healing until he is healed.  
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, then you make the instrument that holds it taut according to what you have done in the hip ligament. 
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine.  
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole from fire so that the point of a razor may enter in it; 
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put on top one pot or the other well sealed, and put on top alkali and heat and sweet awe, until there is a thickness of it as much as the powders that you have well taken in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let him do so until it descends like a fever and chills or as much as it pleases, then take all this matter and place it on coals and on alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then if there will be much fever, and is administered in many works of medicine and cauteries of other members. 
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does this work like fire, and with other medicines which are well cauterized the hip in this way, such as honey, terebinthine, and coals with soap, all these things mixed together.  
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galicians tell us of a cure of which a man was cured of pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and low back, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at one time when this cure was made, and he was bathed as he teaches afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this manner that you prick a little bit of green and dry litharge, and grind it well with a pinch of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is held, and cover it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let him remain for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter into a bath until the body is a little aroused, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's iron, it helps a lot. 
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it must be done the cautery in this manner.  
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take flax and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow which is between the thumb and the foot and the other called fossile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take iron of goat dry, and grip it in fire until it is coals, and put it on the wool, and let it until it is stains. 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and redo again like this, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is ceased. 
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat". 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by excessive bloodletting, or by any kind of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after this that the patient be free of fetid pills or similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;  
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "point"; 
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make III or IV cauteries with the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a narrow throat when they lie down, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find in the last spine of the back and in us its appearance which comes above the other spines.  
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the cautery prick two lines or three, and let the points be near each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a place which is in the nerve's sheath.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they call gout properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot heal it, then it is healed by cauteries in this manner: 
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick upon the face of the foot, then make cautery to the whole cautery as one calls 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then on each knee make three or four cauteries on each side, with all olive-shaped cautery. 
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then make more, but don't hold your hand farther than until the tip of the cautery is burned.  
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, so make points around the socket two lines; 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain in the two, so make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; 
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, so cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and prescribe medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in the arms, and the bones descend to the armpits and it is new, so it is necessary that when you see to cure it, that he does not move it that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the pain descends from his belly; 
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	afterwards he makes him sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to hold his arm as long as the bones are repaired, and rearranges them in his arms, and  signs of an incision below the rupture on the bone of the elbow, and a whole sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heats up the cautery as this shape is: 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it feels tender
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bones in their place.  
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backwards. 
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs on the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other one on his hips which holds his hands.  
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again another time until you come to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and carefully guard so that the boil does not burst when you do the cautery; 
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;  
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that through this the patient does not die, or other harm. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also large according to their measure; 
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed;  
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the cure of other ointments as long as it is healed, and lie the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well joined together;   
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his dressings be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he tries to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, a well-made splint is given him, and it is worn for another forty days. 
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And have good rest, that he does not work too much and be careful of excessive filling of drinking and eating, and of too high a braise. 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And if he follows this instruction, he will be fully healed.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here afterwards the cure of tailoring in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, you make the cautery of cauterization according to its quantity, and a third of the heart.  
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the cure according to what we have said; 
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:  
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the place of incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire fire cautery clavicle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or blow, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is healed by the first cautery, that's good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this name, begin again the cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it must grow on the limb that is near, therefore you must make the cauteries as long as the patient is healing.  
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The month of May is aided sometimes by fire cautery with great help, and also the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you can see that cautery, take care if the patient is at the beginning, and if she is healed according to what we have said in the division, and do not send or stay, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on his head: 
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place the head at nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and II on the II horns, and I behind on the hairline; 
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand so that the cautery comes up to the bone, and as long as the scorches issue out so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue forth; 
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the flesh is spread everywhere;  
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly lost, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and I cautery on its neck, and II cautery on the spine of the neck, and VI cautery on the spine of the back, and I great on the crupie and the other below, and II on the two shoulders; 
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II on the cuts, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;  
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard against the nerves that are on the last bone, that you do not burn them; 
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never has anyone made a cautery on the bone of the finger, and I other on the bone of the stomach, and I other on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when more fire cautery is done, it does more help, and moves it to profit. 
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After cure the place with flour of chickpeas with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cautery on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb. 
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And at times one makes cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed. 
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And nevertheless, let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exit points of nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of albaster
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called "albaras" is present, and the means of medicine are useless, then cauterize with a cautery a small spot, according to the quantity of the hardness of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.  
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then treat with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondine, of each one part; 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it to be arrested, cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nevertheless, the sages say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nevertheless these do not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted this to happen before. 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more skillful thing is that it be cauterized with the cautery called "circle," as we have said among many cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an ailment called "adubelati," and it delays in dying either because of the superfluity it produces or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the tension; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in pricking. 
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it necessary to perform the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of the illness that is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the rot is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	One other way of sickness there is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing else than a gnawing of the limb, because it wastes the limbs as if the lines were dried up.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place where it can endure cauterization with fire all at once, then sharpen the cautery, small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cautery of all parts as long as you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.  
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him be for III days, and put over the cauterized places softened broth with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of suppurations causing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good. 
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if this is not the case, begin the cautery again on that which remains corrupted.  
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this malady has never been cured by medicine alone instead of fire cautery; 
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of medicinal herbs in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the sprouts which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that the feet by fire give birth to a sickness which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a large thing fouled which blunts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this malady is according to 2 manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron cautery as it is a vulture's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can reach the nail in all parts, and that it has subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After place it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail. 
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And let it thus for III days until it begins to get rot;  
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make it an ointment of wild mallows bruised with oil, and leave the ointment upon all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment closing flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them a cautery of hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and is in such manner: 
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a cannon of iron or steel, or a feather of vulture, and put upon the nail and the althelul, that is to say corns, warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the cannon upon it so that it pricks all around, then put a drop of hot oil, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cannon comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot oil going deep until the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and lets the patient suffer a little the sting of hot water an hour; 
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then lets him so, and it will dislodge itself from all its roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have scraped all those that are on the body, then cure the wounds that engender flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shiver from cold, or from quartan fever, or another, it is necessary that you make him four cauteries or four on the spine of his back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; 
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	so letting him tremble, and will hasten his health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pimples painful
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time appear by fires the bathed body, or puss-filled pustules, that come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its point is seized by fire, or of long birthwort root, or the lentil cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes when they appear at the beginning, they are cauterized in this manner, and they cannot grow back from then on, but the superfluities that come from them are removed, and they are healed. 
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.  
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is a very grave thing to prolong.  
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the bleeding is appeased beneath your finger, and no more drops issue.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put on the fire olive cautery more small and large as they are all red; 
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take it [the cautery], whether large or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your hand, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is stopped. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to make those one after another until the bleeding is stopped.  
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient. 
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when without cutting of the artery, one cannot well stitch it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: 
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of thread, or by medicines put on that have power to stitch blood. 
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And be bound and strained well.  
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring it tight with bandages or by placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not benefit it a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and there is no medicine present, then one must put his two index fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and well strain until it is stitched above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and he must not move them, but often moisten them with cold water that is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stitched. 
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make inquiries beforehand of those who need cautery and medicines. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of the knife
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and their origins and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; 
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And we have placed this chapter from the head down to the feet, and in this chapter I will follow the same way for those things that are found more easily for those who want them.  
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin these, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; 
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.  
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If they come from such ones who have suffered so much with their sickness that they die easily because of the famine they find in their illness, and because of the greatness of their wickedness. 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And from these one should have fear.  
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there is one who gives you his meaning, and says: 
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed"; 
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the sickness is spiteful.  
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more emphasis on your honor than on your greed, and do not open yourself fully but wisely to those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take and profit.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored. 
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.  
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three cheers, our Lords give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head to the feet, for those who find it easier.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this sickness comes often to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the head of the child; 
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown.  
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death; 
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave the work in such cures.  
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew each day until he could not bear it; 
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the water grew so much that he died, and this water is assembled under the bone above the spine, between the heart and the bone; 
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such if moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, that you split in between the chest a wide slit; 
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it also be as long as we II, while the moisture runs;  
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the shape of the spatula: 
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the incisions of the chest open from each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you split in the chest III incisions according to this manner: 
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision remove the moisture all outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	Afterward, restrain the incisions with cloth and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then loosen it, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the principal bandage be strained, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and the assembly of the liquid; 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for no times is it in front;
aucune fois derrier;	no times behind;
aucune fois en destre;	No time in the right;  
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no time on the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore take it where the abscess is open, and the filling of the water, and make it according to what you are able.  
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard that you do not cut the artery; 
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	And vein blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.  
de reume	of a summary
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone a sickness which is called “catarre” in the eyes or in the breast, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help at all, then the last cure that is done is cauterization with those which one covers the II arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore it is fitting, since you are about to cut them, that the patient turns his head back; 
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries are open, then restrain the patient's neck to all the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are then returned. 
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the places of the joints, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from II parts, as long as the flesh comes to the bone, and that it be by the wide part of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as I do across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood leaps out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of III digits, then sign it and go until the bone. 
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And that which is necessary of blood to put out is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone without a bit of syphac, then cut it so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes and acute catarrh, for the moistors of tears and the heats in temples and old forsenee and similar things, and it is medicated by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not help it, if we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes his hair rear up from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in some men who are too cold; 
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is returned, then the patient's neck is restrained with some cloths, then the place is rubbed with some rough cloth, and the place is raised with hot water until the artery opens manifestly; 
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the form;
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it upwards with pinches, and separate it well from the webs that are under from each part; 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is subtle, then it is turned to the point of the instrument, then it is cut from that part according to the quantity of the two heads. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will not jump the veins at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And treat with blood from VI to III;  
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in II places with a strong double thread of silk so that rot does not come before the healing of the wound and bleeding comes.  
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut the excess that is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with the cuticular cautery up to the bone as long as the extremities are cut; 
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the best work, if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a warm complexion.  
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cautery helps to finish the dampness: 
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for that is of greater help against dampnesses.   
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts a good tent on top; 
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are untied, so it is cared for with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and bandages, until it is healed.  
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the artery is without cord as you work it, then hurry to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it with your hand that the bleeding be stopped. 
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you lack these things present, then put on the place your thumb until the bleeding is stopped, and raise the place with cold water as long as the bleeding ceases, and be restrained as it is fitting.  
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And that which is more to be done and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery trenching on two parts, but the trenches should be well spaced in order to keep their heat for longer. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too stiff, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it must have between the two knives one doit of wide space, and then when you have signed their two places, and you put the burning iron upon it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places.  
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And be separated between the two shoulders because it is not well healed of this cautery at all or in any way. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery: 
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are on the forehead above the head, and it does not benefit medicine at all if one applies it, and you see the face of the patient becoming entangled, and feel on his forehead a walk like a tremor; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And where the skin is thick and moist so that the hair of the temples falls out, and the temples are dry, and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is necessary. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this sickness the hairs that he have on his forehead, then make three cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead. 
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the cuts be as two should all remove the forehead down to the root, and the other two as two on top of the cheekbones, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are the two on top of the cheekbones. 
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound the quantity of three be on the cross joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to wipe the blood, then put the spatula sharp from two parts where this is the shape.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision which is behind the temple to the second incision. 
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape all the core which is between the two fissures to all the syfas that are on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract further this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first incision you put the instrument called "cultellaire," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the rib cutting towards the flesh to the heart, and the rib bottom toward the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle joint.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches those who open the heart, and then another part make in the middle furrow until the other side. 
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then withdraw blood evenly, and press the wound to stop the bleeding. 
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put cloths moistened in wine, oil, and asphalt above them, and keep that an abscess does not come.  
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the bandage, and then administer a great quantity of tepid water, then apply ointment of basil with rose oil, and other ointments used to treat wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	of the closing of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone comes down with a sharp catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and the vision weakened, and the whites of the eyes burned; 
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and hair falls out, and where it is touched they feel sharp pain, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then know by these signs that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the best remedy for it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a great cut in between the brow, and another one wide in the cheekbone.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begins from the slit of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; 
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; 
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the slit and put old cotton there, and linen bandages;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind above with cloths softened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;  
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying things that make flesh come together. 
En teil maniere:	In this manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it on these wounds to bring flesh together throughout. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beast, or stone, or similar thing like iron; 
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things such as water and oil and similar things. 
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or any other kind of thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction. 
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make him sneeze with condiment, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; 
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear upwards.  
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often a fever comes with this cure;   
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come forcefully, administer an extraction with subtle pinches, for this is the form:  
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps forth forcefully from the pinches, that is good;  
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if those do not, administer extraction to the edge with a small fold. 
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not jump by those, make a tube of reed and insert the head of the tube or orifice of the ear forcefully, and stuff that which is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube.  
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment must be formed, because many times it comes as we have said.  
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come to treatment in such manner, then take glut of this and pluck the feathers, and put it into some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; 
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glut upon the stone or whatever else it may be, and treat as before.  
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come to treatment from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear in such a way that a pus-filled abscess comes out, and spasms.   
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of splitting it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be like a moon, as long as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it gently with your mouth; 
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;  
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be issued, then administer a spatula gentle according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces. 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with fine pincers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.  
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the earache therefore that falls in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a first external of condiment, and opens the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie lying on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it has leaped forward because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if this is not the case, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and warm them a little in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and he puts in the patient one of pierced from his ear, and it is raised up on those legs of other side, and fire of another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. 
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and does not cease to do that of stone on stone until the water comes out all force, and then it jumps all force; 
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see this, then take reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end take fire until the most soft part of the reed is burned. 
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then redo the other piece with other reeds until the water comes out all, as we have said in the stone.  
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large body so that one can feel it, then administer extraction with forceps; 
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the thing lightest to remove which is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms, cleanse the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun.  
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there appear any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the cage of which this is the form: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the sick person, then succeed in forming all the cage: 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often as many times as all the worms exit.  
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff around the cage with cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not sprout forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations 
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether of silver or of iron be cut out at the small opening, and above over to distill; 
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation to the instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the tip carefully cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then throw your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the channel, and the channel be in the ear; 
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And he feels it inside the patient, and if the distillation is a little too hot from the fire then one puts it in the ear. 
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.  
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without a hole in their ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens to people by a swelling of wound, or a boil formed inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from within the ear, if one cannot see them.  
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes it happens that there is a little bit of pus coming out of the hole, and one sees it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That one which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of grievous healing in more cases, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the sick person to the sun. 
et regarde dedens:	and look inside: 
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the  apparent opening, if the work has completely this spatula of what it is the form: 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be smooth and notched in front and behind all plane, so that it does not  bleed the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opening is of flesh or the  flesh of the ear, if the hold with subtle pincers, and the cut lightly, until that flesh is completely removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is done in the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly at the fire, then put it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the opening that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this until no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in red wine, and powder on crushed vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you draw the tent and move another tent moistened in a cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop bleeding which are or treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the skin of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This ailment that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the scope of a spatula from its roots; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the place powdered vitriol.  
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without it does not decorticate, then cauterize it with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision worths moves.   
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repaire, since no thing remains of their roots; 
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return at all.  
de la gresle	of the ankle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem broken in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hailstorm," and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper above and below. 
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such: 
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take ward if the hailstone moves on one side and another, and it is a light thing to know; 
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make then the opening wide, then the peel from each side lightly, then take it with the pliers, and cut it. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the paper, it does not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the tear is large, so assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed. 
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not make force, for the natural healing restores it quickly and prevents scar. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and hold the hailstone with tweezers, and the cup and press from one side and the other. 
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not matter;  
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hailstone is cut, let the salty water eye remain, and care for the place of what generates flesh until the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is generated in the papers above the eye, and it happens more to children than adults, and it grieves their eyes much, and they come to have a cold at the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes;  
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this they lie on their faces down, and sleep like that, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist so that the swelling and the appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye.  
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place to your two hands and feel the snapping between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your breast. 
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him.  
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands on one side and the other, so that the parts are assembled within the circle. 
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a fissure as wide, and no larger than the wound one makes at the vein.  
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin apart until you reach the parts. 
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in more than one disposition comes the parts from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.   
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract therefore with a whole piece of cloth between your hands outwards, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread. 
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And guard that you do not add to the fissure, than you come to all the spatula until the eye, than you it bleach. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exinar does not open at the beginning of the fissure, so sharpen the fissure lightly until it opens. 
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in ash and water, and put on the place, and strap with bands. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind herbs and put them on to corrupt the moisture which is lingering.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then its treatment with plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow in papers  altered other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, then they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases as habitual tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as long as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; 
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and there is the cure according to IV manners:  
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine hot according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and suture or by caines, according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand.  
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, it is good; 
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then you put a needle to all the thread above;  
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and whether it is near the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and you pull the thread upwards to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to all the spatula scraping, from the large tear to the small; 
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then place on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided to all. 
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it is necessary for someone who needs, cut a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make on all the spatula across the two lines that you have marked, and begin with wide tears up to small ones; 
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the blade in one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it all; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air holes the surplus of threads on the two eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you want to do this; 
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, if you don't care, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four; 
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the parchment comes alive to the suturing of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitches are moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another manner:  
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the parchment with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches wide according to the shape which is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then treat those who are sore with little force equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or one that has thread, and insert it into the figure. 
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and insert another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly. 
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then gently lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over where you have marked it, as we have recounted, then join together the two edges of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed. 
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;  
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is converted: 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of bites is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you convert the paper and the lint inside according to what I have said, and then make two bites by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the breadth of the spatula are.  
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and grip as II shoulder of II parts where you hold the arms 
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly upon that which surmounts of the paper of the eye, and hold the II legs of the II parts forming; 
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it so for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrivel and draw together, until it shrinks by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if you seize it with some force, then treat it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn, and if it has been lifted the paper, and they will not prick anymore the hairs;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.  
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The works are such that you prick a fine needle, and it puts the silk thread fine and subtle. 
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the bones and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long. 
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the chase the other silk thread slightly, and knot the heads of the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head in your hand. 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and be facing the sun so that the works are clear, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle at all the chase in the root of the hair placed, and make it pierce into the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull the hair up to the root, and put that hair into the wound if there is one or two or three or more; 
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull out your hand as long as the hairs come out of the entire wound in the paper with the natural hair.  
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull out the wound down to all the thread that you have ordered, until the wound comes out through the opening above and that you see it by the sight of the eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you will pull out the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and flesh grows above; 
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, you accompany one long hair of the natural ones, and whether it is raised with that one or you leave it, as long as it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this sickness which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting comes into the eye, there are two ways of it. 
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.  
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by a sudden blow from a wound or incision or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open that sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside it lint, and bind it until it is healed. 
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not fitting that you use in its cure things that dry and constrict.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	Because if you do those things, the sickness comes back worse than the first. 
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use softening things, such as fennel.  
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the root of water or aloe and linseed are cooked, and the oil of diaquillone melted in any oil, and it envelops a lint, and cures it with those things.  
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not join together according to the form that it was before. 
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And this work that we have said is nothing but the treatments of this malady, that it does not return according to the form that it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the shard which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work in it is that you prick a needle, in which it has double thread, and you put it into the skin, and make it pierce from the left eye to the right, so that the threads come in two shoulders of the skin; 
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then hold the skin above the whole needle, and the end at the spatula wide.  
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If this is not so, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits where the cost is inside the paper. 
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them so angled that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "italic" ;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that cartilage, according to the quantity that its costs are below, from those which follow the paper, then join the two detached parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for it as we have said of softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a split or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat split below the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. 
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must make the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything of all their power how they make return the figure to its natural form; 
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what it is necessary of work and instruments in many dispositions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	of the pressing of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soldering happens to a man's hands in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it upwards; 
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And the extent as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula subtle, which should not be too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula be too blunt nor pierce the eye; 
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision, where you have peeled together the assembly, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; 
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And let the entire assembly be healed, and never use saltwater in the eye, but clear water, and of barley-water.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an egg white; 
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day use barley-water and similar things until it is healed.  
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	One is nervous and similar to hard styrax, and another which is not at all nervous, but is similar to white moisture frozen, that when one touches it with iron and cauterizes it in pincers, one cannot. 
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both of those appearances begin toward the great tear, and cross point by point until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens his eyes;  
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lifts the paper with your hand, then while you hold it with the pincers of small folds and pull it upwards;   
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put on its thread the hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and a strong thread; 
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a bit and put it in the fold, and pierce it with the whole needle, and tie the fold with a thread and pull it upwards, and scrape all the hair along the edge of the fold that follows the wrinkle and the silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear towards the entire spatula with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears as usual; 
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the finger is stuck to the bone alone, and on the string, as we have said. 
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the scraping has the whole spatula shape of which this is the form: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced.  
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision put in the eye a bit of ground silk, and of the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day.  
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure of those that are necessary until it is healed. 
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the fingernail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this kind of fingernail is cured with medicines.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And lift the eye gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and its root is urgent, so distill from your mouth into the colic eye made of litargire and the red colic and seal broited, and stop the eye until the other day. 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is entirely removed.  
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then treat the boil first and cure it well until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the tear harms the eye by great nuisance, so suspend it to the oncine, and cut off a part and not half all, that body of tears does not come. 
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the colic eye red which is made of litargire.  
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which rises upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men are born no times red, and cover the prunella and restrain upon the papers and turn them to the fire, and seem a rose of baluster. 
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work of this is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, then opens the eyes and coils all that flesh with appropriate incisions to it, and sustains with strength. 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting to the razor until the end, and be careful that you do not wound the eye during the work; 
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and to the small forces by which one removes the seb, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then use the oil of wool ground or distill with red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of the eye cotton with a bit of yolk, so that it be assured of hot pus; 
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains there, and the skin of the wound swells, and you doubt an abscess hot, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess. 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is sound, and thus do when the char is attached in the eye by this appearance. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless it is necessary that you align the treatment of each weak eye of the natural path;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental path, in the work of iron. 
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.  
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Bloody veins are visible that are covered over the eye, and they take away from its work and weaken the eye all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary first that you look at the eye, in what it is, and where it is, and there is no other sickness except for the uvula.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then the coil in this manner: 
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then suspend those veins at the entire body according to his knowledge, and let the incisions be subtle double according to this form 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And they shall be two ounces by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then one coils those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins away from the eye 
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and guard that you do not pierce the eye at the points of the spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you will have done this, if distill in the eye colic green and red to corrupt those who are remaining from the blood 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces: 
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The wound that is named “arissati” fistula:  
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and with burning hot medicine according to what I have said before, and if it is not healed, then there is something in it that you should cut into the abscess where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.  
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then there is all the instrument of what this form is: 
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief," and it is made of iron into the shape of a hook, and it is pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the place of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; 
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then return to their place with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the bones are joined, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is joined, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew or become infected again, and a bad accident does not happen, know that it is healed. 
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, if there is no other way than to bring the fistula back to the entrance according to this form: 
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at 3 angles, and the fist be thinned out to the top as you see here:  
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then put it on the bone below the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through this as if he holds his hand on his nose.  
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And after you restore its place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh has risen and hardened the joints, then it goes to the nerve;  
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open from all of it and they do not come to disturb the nerve or lessen, then you must tie up the patient; 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then heal it, then place the patient on leeches or a heater without injuring him to suck out blood, then put on the eye ointment made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and bandage it with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft bandages and double each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; 
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then restrain it from above with a hard band, and reapply the suction cups to draw without injuring.  
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye restrained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, it is necessary that you restrain it much. 
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good;
se ce non;	If not; 
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he starts the  bandaging and dressings and linen and suction cups as long as it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the derangement of web woven
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open, and comes out like papers as if grain of resin, and is expectable to see. 
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the top, then thrust another needle where there is the double thread of the part of the tear. 
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then remove the needle and put on top the eye half-silk in an abundance of egg. 
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the threads come off with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed. 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And at times the wound is restrained by a cloth circle on each side until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes show great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes in from the eye, and correct the whitish moisture and bring down the eyes, and insert it into the meantime. 
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract it until it is healed.  
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowl of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati"  is nothing but a web which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water. 
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it until you see the web coming up to your eyes.  
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then it is sewn together, and does not descend, and let the light be removed from it, and the patient sees things as he desired. 
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not apparent as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and feel on the cornea above the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bowel issues. 
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is out, distill in the hot water mixed with honey, or water where fennel is boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have shown the likenesses of waters in the division, and those that are fitting to consider.  
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the sun's light, and tie the healthy eye and hold it very tightly. 
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eyes are right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that white part of the eye to the side of the less tear duct, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and retract your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the point of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black;  
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye; 
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the water is, then express it below one way after another.  
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest the little, and if the water rises the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is once fixed and it does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand poco a poco.   
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in sharp a bit of silk thread, and remove from it the oil inside.  
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by way of defense the eye plugged with a cloth or felt moistened in rose oil and honey, and tie it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top a common broth with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit", for this is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce then only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep into it, but make it subtle, then put in almond, as we have said.   
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, equip the patient with the sleeping mat beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.   
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be free from all movements, and eat light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day. 
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then untie him in that same dark house, and observe his vision, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not right that you do these things in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bandage them because the water rises quickly.  
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When an abscess comes, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who soothe abscesses. 
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is appeased, then unbind the eye and put on its face a little border to cover for any day, and let it be in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then from the house a little bit here and a little bit there, and let itself turn in its case; 
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that none of the disciples should interfere in this matter. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond cake by which one sucks the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; 
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.   
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the resemblances of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them see them. 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be properly of a kind of wood:  
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone on the birth
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	At times they are born or grow askew and diverse, for which reason some seem like scorpions with many legs;  
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such ones where they have bark split of bad color, and if the wood has a good color beneath it. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that one, then, of these branches which is sound and not split, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; 
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and place the herb on those branches, and they will be pulled out. 
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then take what you are able to hold on the fine sharp point of a knife as long as you know that that branch is completely removed.  
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if any thing remains which one cannot cover, then open it all with the most subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains there. 
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if without a swelling or abscess chaws, if its short as it should be;  
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the pus is exuded and all the char are removed, then pour  water or wine there. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; 
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is raw flesh on the bone above, which is why the instruments do not come to cut;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore it is necessary that you put in a thread of linen somewhat thick, and be knotted by hands of ours, and have between each knot the space of an inch or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and puts the patient's shoulder down into its socket with his hand, and pulls in smelling until it comes through the nostril inside the mouth; 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do children so at school, and it is an easy thing to him who wants to do it;  
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other carefully as we who are or thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the nostril has corrupted that flesh, then pull the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight into the nostril as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is remained of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then put on his new bandage until it is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, use them. 
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which we distill the oils and medicines therein: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a bowl, and its conductors also: 
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish, make a closed bowl, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; 
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have a handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone on the birth
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease is born in the head called "telul," and it grows and becomes very large, so that it is a visible thing to look at; 
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it, then put on its place the cautery or the burning medicine; 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays to cover it until it is large, then take heed if it is hard, of dusky color, of poor sense: 
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If it isn't touched with iron for it is a festering abscess, because when one covers it at any time, there comes great harm to the patient; 
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dusky color, and you see that one can fully cover it, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and cure the place with drying and constricting things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these works cartilages, it profits little, because in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, one sees if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two lips with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground. 
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other soldering plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution:  
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you.  
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Sometimes in the lips, men have abscesses hard, like grains of rice, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each nostril, and take them with tweezers and cut them in each part. 
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stained; 
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.  
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times on the gums grows flesh that is attached, which the ancients call "albulus"; 
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the bleeding to stop;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the wound powdered vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders; 
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return after the cautery; 
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for covering.  
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough. 
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and putrid, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	So it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your arms, and raise the teeth or scabs as they appear, until nothing remains. 
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus do of the blackness and yellowing, and jaundice and other blemishes, as long as they are seen.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; 
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If it is not so, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all healed.  
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth need various tools for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasp with which one removes teeth outside have other forms than those with which one removes between the teeth. 
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be equipped with you.  
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when treating the tooth for pain that you take a while to draw (it) as much as you can because one must not do otherwise; 
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very high substance until then, we have no excuse to scrape.   
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to endure pain, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient needs the pain, and thinks it is the good tooth, and draws (it) out. 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of that, as long as the evil is present, because we have already seen it happen to our elders.  
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the tooth aching, it befits that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula strong to protect the gum from all parts; 
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then bring it to your pliers or very fine forceps at the first notch and notch, until it is well spread apart, then firmly secure the pliers. 
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's shoulder be in your holy between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After you have pulled the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and push it gently inside from each side, and move it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the bone is pierced and broken, then you must fill it with bandages where the perforations are; 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and gently restrain it with pliers so that it does not break when restraining.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore take good care that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and return to the patient through the wickedness of the root greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone and bring no one to what we have recounted. 
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring forth at times by the opening of these great illnesses due to the roots that remain, or because of the jawbone they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt; 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply ground vitriol to the place; 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not help, cauterize it.  
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, to which one pulls teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the shapes: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be thick members so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold the parts.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put on the place moistened cotton in butter every day or two, as long as the area softens, then use the pliers called "algefri," because the jaw resembles a beak of attention; 
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and be made inside like a file, and that is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue with all these pincers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, because of this is its form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out of those, it is good. 
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If these are not there, with the help of all your instruments, as their forms come after here: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II reins, of this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are in front in the order of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great pliers, whose form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted. 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument according to what their works and the illness demonstrate to them, for there are such illnesses where the old ones do not teach any instrument because of the diversity of others, and if one does not break the bone or other bones, or where it may occur, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, as what is here is the form. 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it. 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the place with suitable medicines for them, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all these instruments: 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and it cannot be filed or trimmed: 
adonques lou raie;	then the edge;  
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is near with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is here, and resembles a small beak, and be of sharpened iron at its summit: 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope a little and little with hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a tool like this is its form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also like the file with which one makes needles;  
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and with a file smooth the tooth little by little in hands gently, so that it doesn't move until it falls;  
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then smooth it in the end with no scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then file the sharpness until it's equal, so that it doesn't prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.  
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth before loosens, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he doesn't bite, and you have cured them with medicine restraining, and these don't work; 
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver threads become green and corrupt, but gold never changes. 
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be moderate neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth being crowded together, take the thread and the double end between the two healthy teeth, then put the head between the teeth yours, if there are one or more, until you come skillfully to the healthy tooth on the other side; 
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin again the covering until the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move at all; 
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.  
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the head of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it unties, or the threads break, so strain it with another thread; 
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remained and would serve thus all its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the placement of the II healthy teeth, and the II mine, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.  
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and no one intervenes who is not wise and suffering, and never once does one make the form of a tooth from bone of calf, and one puts it in the place where the deficiency is, and one restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never once is this ligament that comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus;  
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a wound joined; 
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hands, and lift the tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve cord wide, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or knot, and that is due to a wound, then put the probe and cut wide that nerve. 
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and keep that incision not too deep, for the artery which is underneath;  
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done that, then lift the place with a rose and white, or with cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent of linen; 
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and bind the patient every night so that the place cannot close up.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, put on the place powdered vitriol; 
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentil cautery, which is good for this.  
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then the cure of other cures until he is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see it with a black or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer. 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is turning white and there is moisture, lay the ointment on it, and apply it with a small spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other. 
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if the patient refuses to comply with your work, put on crushed vitriol until it is whitened, then return to your work as long as you draw out all the pus. 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise the level of ash and earth, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes comes from within the throat growths called "godaths," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful: 
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is abscesses hard of small size and red colored, do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood. 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let it be until it is ripe, and then you will part it, where it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white color and the root is subtle, have the instrument prepared to cut, but first look whether the abscess is warm and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his shoulders be on your healthy side, and he open his mouth and you put the instruments between his hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it is of silver or thin iron as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Since you are pressing the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and put it in the middle, and draw it upward more than you can. 
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do nothing with the cloths, then cover with the instrument from this is the form, that seems like forces; 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and nevertheless the head are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other. 
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the abscesses, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and vinegar, and thus. And if a discharge of blood happens, then gargle the patient with water, or juices of pomegranates boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; 
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it until it is healthy; 
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And no other abscesses ever arise in the throat other than the two tonsils, so cut them thus as the two tonsils are. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was growing inside her throat, namely the small abscess; 
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and I had closed the entire throat very tightly, so that the woman could not expire through the airway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained like this for a day or two. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high raised that it had to have been put II reigns by the II openings of the two.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened therefore, and placed one finger in the throat, then pushing out through it, and pulling out a large portion of the bowel;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I put the other end into the other opening where it was lodged, and opened the mouth and pressed down on the tongue; 
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after he opened the abscess and cut into one part, and there came out only a little blood 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the woman's throat was unblocked and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess grew back again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I grasped it and cauterized it inside the throat 
ensi demora sens croistre;	and then it stopped growing.  
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the stem returns to the grape and it is swollen and long, that is called "perpendicular
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is small and round, it is called "grape". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the pus-filled abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it behooves you to cut it. 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded assembled and is not long;  
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a rust color or black, then it behooves you to widen the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument about which we have made mention earlier; 
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then place the needle in the eye, and treat it with this, and cut it at the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term;  
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cut more, so it harms to the voice and to speech; 
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use of those that we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it as long as it is healed.  
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid to have it cut, then you must use something to lessen the fear of cutting.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confides with boiling water cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear;  
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in employing the end of this instrument, from which this form is: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have on the head a tuft where one puts the medicine, as the end of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; 
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and the mucus flow from his mouth outside, so that it does not go down to the throat, and into the chest. 
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the whole medicine and press on the eye, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the bites of the medicine be calmed. 
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton in the canal of the eye, until the cotton rests on the eye. 
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after IV or V days. 
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to begin the cautery of the medicine again, then begin it again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify that which is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be washed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed. 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated by fumigation according to this manner, take wormwood and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and savory and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them in a pot, and put water in it, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot have the instrument heated according to this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or iron, and one end of the piece put into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead. 
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards it should be repeated often until the eye dries, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen. 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make any of these cures except at the decline of an abscess hot. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put inside its head a bit of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. 
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the yolk of egg does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether healthy.  
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it has been put in the throat bones or spine of fish, or any other thing; 
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; 
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and that which does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach; 
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	perhaps if this thing were expelled by vomiting; 
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cloth, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;  
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie to the sponge the thread, and then swallow it; 
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to its place, it will harden, and then you will draw it out;   
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of wood according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head raised high;  
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it come alive, nor push bone inside.  
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And move it so that the patient puts the instrument in, because he must know if the thing is eased or not. 
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If he pushes down, or he pulls it hard with all the instrument evenly, until it is hard. 
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the throat cutting
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	At no time is the bloodletting medicinal, as I have said in the division, by means of medications;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, treat it with all small instruments, or subtle tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a horsehair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the end of the horsehair into the fire hot, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient remains with a fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full a cup of cold water, and open his mouth, and let him pour it into his throat without swallowing, and move it with your hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the wounded person feels the water, he falls. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if he does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the smoking of the grape; 
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will fall without resisting. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the smoking is that you take a pot or it has live coals inside, and let the pot be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then throw your smoke in it, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the wound; 
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the wound will now fall, and if it doesn't fall, then begin the smoking again many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and suffers the patient thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and drinks no water. 
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And therefore it is necessary that she be cured by this governance.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument with which one treats bleeding is like, when one can see it, tongs curved to enter into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness of lime so that what it takes it cannot leave. 
et vez ci la forme:	And see here the form:  
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many things similar to abscesses are, according to those that the memory comes after here from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size. 
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners of which one is in its very same appearance, and from that which it holds moisture.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the eyes where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the base, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses one must not pierce until the boil is mature according to its accomplishment. 
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are of such kind that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left as long as it is rotten and swollen, by chance the tendons and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay piercing until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb. 
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then if it is ripe.  
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion has occurred, except for the one that is below its base, so that it does not push out and become longer within, and a fistula comes from it. 
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and not be able to heal in a great term.  
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is done according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and healing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; 
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you make the perforation where more dependent the base of the abscess, and where it opens with pus; 
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and be the perforation of the long side of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal parts where there is no folding.  
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that are dislocated, according to which limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is worth while that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before these, then the body of the worm will be lengthened, and it is full of much filth. 
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And by chance they harden the lips and deepen them.  
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that is perceived according to the width of the body, according to what the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring in small pustules, small openings; 
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large pustules, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; 
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if it has such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the heart, and cover; 
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it becomes like a shroud, and is dead, then it is necessary to do the same as with boils; 
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if it has such that are cut in three angles, and if it has such that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angles; 
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if there are such or one makes a round cut, and other cuts and seeming cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully;  
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part;  
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing from it; 
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times little by little, until all the pus is gone;  
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Likewise if the patient is of weak strength, or a woman carrying, or a young child, or an old man decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes trembles with the issue of the bowels, that perchance the patient dies, and you do not lose yourself.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;  
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a plain incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton; 
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put a tent in each one so that they come against each other; 
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and stitched it back together, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from flax cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the abscess will heal, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, then administer cold water and ice, and moisten the cloth, and put it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book. And if it is during winter, and the place where the abscess or wound is is very sensitive, then you must put moist tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil on top; 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in this state, and the limbs are fleshy, then it behooves you to put upon them soft cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said. 
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it as is proper, until it is healed.  
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this it behooves to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: 
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is this chapter.  
des soros	Of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the heart of the head comes little abscesses, and are manners of ours that are in webs, just like the braiding of a tunic, and there are many resemblances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such as those which have moisture also like poultices; 
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are some that are hard and stony in shape, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are that you experience to all instrument which is called "entromissoire", from what the form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then lift it up by the long end.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, then scrape it without leaving the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns as soon as one leaves it so; 
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; 
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; 
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And remove that which is left over of the ointment.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that there is no more ointment left;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.  
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds in its fat, then cut it according to this form, of length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and you dig out the pus, and its skin from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the core where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery works against you, then do what I have told you afterwards. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do for an abscess if it is foul, and how to cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the boil on the abscess festering and moist, it is lighter because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if to some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of these old abscesses that I scraped or head of an old woman; 
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; 
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had made none of them, one would have done as well a wound as from a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or chief,  for that which come to the head of children and to the roots of the ears, let the opening be always towards the most dependent place, in order to drain better. 
et les cure si com il covient.	And the cure as is proper.
des scrophules	of scrofulous
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are bad, and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofulous [affliction] is properly inside its part, like the boils and abscesses of the head, as we have said;  
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the resemblances of these scrophulous [afflictions] are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In that one therefore that you see of good disposition to the touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves in each part and is not at all averse to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	so it is necessary that you cut it from above and the skin of each part, and extend the two lips of the heart like incisions, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head. 
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and the probe and probe, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be the spatula or trowel, so that the hands escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and tighten the wound.  
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the hand is stained, return to your work, until you have completed it; 
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then if there remain any small pustules on your index finger, cut them and remove them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the base of the pustule, it is not necessary to cut the pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang, without causing pain.  
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole scrophula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining superfluity for the size of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	So it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk forth, and the count as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those pustules that hold too much fluid, pierce them where they appear to be ripe;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce them as described before, depending on the location, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment to prevent flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat;  
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is the writing of their words. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cut in the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; 
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one does not help with this, because all the veins and arteries of the patient are hot to those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the stylet, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those [parts] are so suitable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.  
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, then cleave [it] as far as it comes to the channel; 
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the sifac, as we have said; 
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel which jumps out of place which is broken, and by the lack of voice; 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a bit.  
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone except for the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.   
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one does not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut open the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death; 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this, the elders command to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I shall tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young lady took the knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the peritoneum. 
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by her to cure her, and found her as dead.  
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and I see well that it had not struck a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healed; 
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young lady did not have any further problem, except that she had a hoarse voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; 
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.   
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "a hernia in the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it exists according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	Natures, and accidents; 
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Or nature has no engine. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is in two ways, of which one is like pus to us, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from our artery; 
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear in it, and it does not behoove to work fiercely except in this one that is small, and proves and searches the entire introduction:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like our pus, and cannot to any vein, if you cut it, as one cuts the pus, and the track to its entire tip, if there is any. 
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And surround it well soon, and cure it as it behoves, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many manners of pus are, which I will say all the appearances;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it is necessary for me to say all the difference which is between us and dislocation. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that a dislocation is sometimes accompanied by fever and inflammation as long as the boiling (or inflammation) has not passed, and putrefaction has come to completion. 
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Therefore rest the fever and heat. 
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the sprain there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a swelling, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a bruise, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And there are according to its appearances, whether it is thick or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the cure of the new, that you try and inquire first to all the instrument which is called « entromissoire », according to what its form will come or chapter which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of incision of an abscess from a sprain is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points (of the instrument) and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then let it be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the intromitter, and take heed of those who leap. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs short, whatever color it is, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.  
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the intromitter no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, so treat it with a cross and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape each side and ward the cloth where it lies so you can draw it out healthy with the needle.  
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to us many times.  
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if some remains and it does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and drain the wound, and put on soothing things above, an abscess hot, and treat it with other cures until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large for us, then we sew the two lips of the wound, and treat with those who create flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is pulsating for you contrary or otherwise hasten and apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, as long as the wound suppurates, and rest the boiling of blood. 
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to covering what is remaining from within.  
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the introduction instruments, and there are in three ways: 
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are in three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles that one sews with sorcerers, and they are of citrine iron or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more proven from black lead to encircle the curves of fistulas.  
et sont de III manieres:	And they are in three ways: 
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here:  
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are probes that have two curves in three ways also; 
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are probes that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are probes that have two curves, and probes of one curve only, and they are in three ways; 
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all of these are necessary in their place.  
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these things that one does is cutting, and there are some which do not cut more than from one side, because we skin them, for this reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve. 
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers are the probes put into handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses.  
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways. 
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see.   
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use them more than in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and flanks, and similar places.   
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and at no time is the other instrument small, seeming to scrapes of fistulas, according to this form, which one drains blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it once in its place which is wholesome to cutting of veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like women's breasts.  
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must follow this form from line .b. to .g.:  
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound,  healing flesh, then join the two sides of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it is healed. 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast leans down and softens due to its size, as it happens with women, then make two incisions above it. 
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one hangs from the other at the end of each, so that the larger piece contains the smaller, according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer there what we have said of stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, for that the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; 
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it stay until it dries the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.  
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the arms are kinds of hard scrofulas which have edges, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g..
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the matter that is in the abscess is emptied, put the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment after this as long as it is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofulas, then cut it as we have said for incisions into scrofulas, and if the wound is bowed inward, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is severed, and the skin above is seared shut, then abscesses often arise, and it also happens to the swollen vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if he knows this is for the artery, then let the abscesses grow long. 
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it in your hands, it feels like constriction; 
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then it appears red and hot.  
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and at the neck and in many other places, and is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to abandon the treatment of iron, and whoever is at the head should also abandon it, and in those who are swollen with artery felt through the long skin; 
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the incision carefully, and depart beautifully the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;  
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then put under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in the temples; 
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point the place which is between the two joints of an intromissoire until the pus that is there, and be careful of the abscess. 
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the cure that engenders bowel, as long as the ligament hangs; 
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure those of ointment coming to these, as long as they are healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you tie with your hand those that you can of the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and let it have a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts as the two ends of the thread; 
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the needle isn't far enough, reinsert another needle through all of the pus below the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads back in four places. 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until all of the excess comes out, then cut away the superfluity from the core and leave what is attached. 
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then administer care with tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are burned or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is restrained firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in proportion to the body, but below the core;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And keep it still from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, neither sideways nor up and down, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron. 
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	For fear it might contract.  
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a pad. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; 
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a sling, and lance it, then drain it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large bladders hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes there appears in the belly and nowhere else a tumor, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its appearance as such, and is the root subtle, and the head large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are some small and some very large. 
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw the man who had II in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were slightly split, and pus oozed from them 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI III., and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the vessel is white and moist and of subtle root; 
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if it's cut with a broad spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery.  
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	Because at the incision often comes many large hemorrhages of blood, and if the bleeding does not stop, then hasten to cauterize. 
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the incision of iron, then take a thread of wool well made, and tie the vessel as we have said, and leave it for II days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of lead until it heals the articulation, and it will be healed by it without work. 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, if there is fear to cauterize even for the belly, but you may well cauterize half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.  
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cauterize the thread that is of dark color and poor sense and milky appearance. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess encrusted, and I will come to the cure of ulcers after.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the head is carried
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the body, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the body and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with diverse issue.  
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its sides it returns, and then returns again, and perhaps it is seized, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and for heavy work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all;  
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is for blood, then open by these signs the abscess thick and hard, and is filled according to a quantity;  
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, then it is puffed by touching, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.  
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said to you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bile, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be outstretched straight, then feel all around the belly;  
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to move his bowels between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the whole great one-inch.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the two ends be tied together.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on the half of the abscess extending over the linen, and put your index finger in it, and probe the interior. 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it stuck to the linen, untie it, and bring the interior out of the depth of the belly; 
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find it boiled, take it with the pincers, and cut off the excess.  
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go beautifully around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and insert the two needles back into what you have done in crosswise so that you make it pierce. 
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four leagues on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there as long as it purges, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself.  
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and soft, then the care of it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said. 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is proper, and bind the place. 
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the appearances of sores, and how one must work them by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; 
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we say that a sore  begins in the marshes, and great caution is needed in its cure, and ancients said when a sore is in a place where one can scrape it like sores which are on the nipples, and in the groin, and in similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is in the beginning; 
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I can never heal any of them. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever cured them before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black blood at any time. 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then put the patient in good condition to do the work; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw your incisions or ulcers and the hair from all parts and the bone from all parts without leaving anything.  
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow completely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped. 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other cures until it is healed.  
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.  
si est eclites soulement;	It is struck alone; 
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: 
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and hypoarche, for it is a mortal thing;  
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore when you medicate this semblance of dropsy which is called "eclights" and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as gout and diarrhea and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; 
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: 
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient straight on your hands, and the assistants press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the basin, then take the spatula spine according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And shall be sharp of II parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	To a point, and nevertheless, it should not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when one inserts it, and one cannot bleed it. 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if hydropisie is formed towards the intestines:  
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If it is appropriate, that you cut in below the hip bone, three fingers to the right of the hip; 
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if hydropisie is due to the disease of the liver, then the incision should be made on the left side of the hip bone, three fingers. 
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is not appropriate that the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not run to the weak place. 
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and it will burst, and lift your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the fascia as much as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or less. 
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the shaft as long as the spatula reaches its eighth place, and this is the level of the water, then remove the blade, and put this instrument in which is the shape: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a silver chain that is subtle, and it is of iron or light steel, and on the lower part, there is a small hole. 
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it costs from one side, III pierced.  
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and II on the other side, and I on the other; 
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which the writers cut the feather: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the  alemele, so that when the instruments come to the point, it descends now on the instrument; 
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty the half or the third part, because if you empty more than it is proper in that hour, by adventure the patient dies for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death; 
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; 
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart that stops the opening which is on the surface, for this reason I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner. 
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering these, and treat the point a small quantity. 
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and keep from probing until there remains but a little point of fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you let too much fluid out, so cure him with  earth or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and have him drink.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	At times children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, then he must see to every little detail very carefully according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put in the hole a small plug of lead, and tie it and keep it so for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the plug, and make water, and then put it back. 
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps it does not work because the urine coming out does not allow it to be closed.  
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose hole is small, if he is medicated with the clove of plantain, as we have said, it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the urethra in its place are blue because none are born with the urethra at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the mouth, and this is a bad illness.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way to operate is that the patient lies flat on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were a feather, so that the urethra falls in the middle, as it should;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard yourself from the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, with the stanch of those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this albata comes in the region, and is a disfiguring appearance of flesh;  
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	And there are malignant and non-malignant ones; 
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	So it is necessary that you prick them with the sharpest needle and cut and cleanse all of them, then put upon it moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment. 
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with Diaphicon ointment until it is healed.  
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of bad color and pus, then you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it open, and if the albata is in some part within the penis and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the albata that is inside first; 
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is united, care for it well. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, make sure the head of the shaft is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shaft and groin. 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupt, then cover it with a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and veils, then cure it with other dressings until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries help with two kinds of positions together: 
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, in the reduction of blood and against corruption.  
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the shaft is corrupt and withdrawn, it is necessary that you place a chain of plank in the shaft and let the patient urinate among them.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is irritated at the head of the stick which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument until the tendons are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult thing to discuss these, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula any pox on the head of the penis and the skin; 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully separate them, and put between them the fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not irritate;
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a wound of continuity like the others; 
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	nevertheless, when we do this work of our will, and properly to the children, then it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for salvation. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not say the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the healers who did circumcision around the Dal, and to all strength, and a whole scalpel; 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if it was the shears because there are two of them, and by chance if one cuts above and remains below. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is the Dal is not assured the tip of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and at the purification of the angle by chance escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted it. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification that is made by force to all the linen thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, so equally in all soul tension;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the child be well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and be the manner of the first work that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only force him to tie the thread around the penis and then let him rejoice in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make it be between your hands straight, and bring back the forces between your hands or beneath your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.  
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand to the shaft and blow where the heart is, and pull it up as long as the head of the shaft is within. 
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one point and the other to the other.  
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it as II does by the second loop to the pocket and to the index finger, and cut between the two loops, then lift the heart upwards carefully and pull the head of the shaft. 
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let blood flow drop by drop, for that is the measure.   
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder the drape is glued with a yolk of an egg cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and let it remain until the next day, and heal it with another healing as long as it is healthy.   
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the purification is this: 
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two arms should be straight and sharp, and the arms as large as the hand equally.  
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of purification is when the kernels inside are at the incision. 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it behooves you to extend it to your fingernail, so that the lesions make an abscess; 
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cover it equally, and if you cannot hold it on your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cover it. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pierce for III days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess has calmed and slightly peel it. 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	then cover it as you can, and keep from the part of the rod, it will harm it nothing.  
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore cure the place with things softly wound a wound of powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts too much, and it goes upward, it will not hurt. 
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.  
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from an obstacle in the stone, or blood clotted, or a bowel, or fatty substance, or similar things, that we have said in the division.  
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is from the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it befits that the patient be bent upon his knees. 
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let his feet be placed on his back, and stretch his belly from the upper part to his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can.  
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and therefore it constrains the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, for which the urine is released. 
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer to him extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", for this is its form:  
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of silver, finely wrought and light, like the feather of a bird; 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and be the shaft a palm long and a half, and be finely wrought at the head.  
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the urine's discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie to the head one piece of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the superfluity of the wool and bring it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and rue leaf, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;  
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently put the syringe on the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis above towards the bud; 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and feel the patient's feeling coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except for those who lead or where it goes is twisted;  
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then stretch the thread all over the wool and pull it, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make sure the urine is correct; 
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder ailments
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood come in the bladder, or rot is assembled there, and you see them distilling sharp waters and medicines, do as to all the instrument that is called “clepsedre,” and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if to the III perts:  
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; 
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the eyes cover because by this the medication is such that it stops well the member without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary; 
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see fitting your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the catheter into the moisture, and pull with the pulling which is inside; 
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you draw the moisture to the catheter, and then push firmly back the pulling inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one cleanses the bladder:   
si est ci:	If it is here: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And is of silver or of arch-wood, and is the head higher. 
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below to the breast where the bones fall;  
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see to be used for enemas in it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good doubled thread, and heat that moisture on fire; 
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then put the head of the enema into the rectum, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder; 
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread through these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a hoop, and put inside it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; 
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done of the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; 
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have said the difference between the stone engendered as rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work of cutting; 
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis; 
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.  
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder so often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; 
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it appears hareng [unclear], and grieves the patient his penis, and it hurts him many times, and then becomes red; 
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and to many of these jumps the foundations. 
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is light healing in children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as moderate, to those who are between youth and old age; 
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and loosen and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and comes out sometimes from its high place; 
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands apported, and his hands be under his thighs so that the bladder be entirely declining down;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then press and touch inside; 
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall upon touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult.  
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And put it in its base, and seize the stone, and when you feel it with your right hand, then move it to the bladder neck. 
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press upon your right, and put it out to the outside where you wish to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where one makes the incision. 
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then put the spatula cuttingly, of which this is the form:  
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make between those who are between the testicles and the base, neither in the middle but at the side of the left hip. 
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your thighs should be even or foundation, and let the hips be wide outside so that it is wide from the outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by adventure the press if the thighs which are or foundation, that she leap be without work;  
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such stone where it has angles, and margins: 
si est griés a issir;	if it is grated to issue;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is such which is smooth, seeming like a gland, and round, whose issue is light. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To this one therefore where it has angles and margins, make the hips larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, it is necessary that you extract it with tongs which are like a file at the head, so as to tighten the stone so that it does not escape. 
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you insert underneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head.  
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engage it this way, then enlarge the hole and if the stone is covered, strain with vitriol.   
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, and then remove it with the instruments, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be cauterized, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For these things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or the urine comes back through the place where the lesion cannot be sutured.  
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But nonetheless, you must try to remove it, or break it up with the tongs, as long as you remove it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, then apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a soft cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.  
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then rest the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you set it, so well raised its place with oil and water, then the cure of ointment diaphicon and ointment basilcon, until it be healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosion, and blood clotting in the bladder, and due to this the urine is held back, which is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: 
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore drain your wound well and extract that blood, because if it remains, then the bladder will corrode and be spoiled.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then wash the wound with water and ash and salt, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed. 
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and apply the medicines on the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is or carried by the penis, and fixed in there, and the urine cannot flow out; 
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you cure it of what I say thus, that you cut it many times, and one excuses the cutting of the stone by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I a piece of iron according to this form and let it be three-angled shaped in one stick.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then put the borer into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone. 
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the borer in your hand on the stone peck and peck, until you can feel the stone from the other side. 
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if the urine comes then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis.  
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	It is then immediately broken, and jumps out with urine, and the patient heals. 
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make the stick in the right place in the stone between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And care for it until it is healed.  
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There happens that stones are embedded in women, and if it happens once, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for three things: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perchance the woman is a virgin;  
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second is that one cannot find a well-knowing woman who will reveal her privates, even when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that perchance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;  
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, so it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a wise midwife, and put the truth on her, and if you cannot find one, point no matter; I cast mire subtle. 
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her about the incision of the stone. 
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well if the woman is a virgin: 
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to put her foot or foundation and seek the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she confines her under her foot, and recommends to her that she put her foot or on the sick woman, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming.  
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh;  
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cone, where it is moved appeared, and feel the stone in that part; 
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his two above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small;  
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then push the root into the tail, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: 
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins.  
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the stone does not come out, then put powdered vitriol, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained; 
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone remains, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to aid you in your work; 
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the artery does not stop bleeding, and it is from the artery that is cut, then place the powder on the wound and strain with bandages, and do not begin again those actions, and leave the stone and do not milk it, lest the patient die by chance;
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the eyes are closed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramic aquouse is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white substance found in the yolk of the eggs. 
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg.  
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the skin of the yolk between the white syfac that we have said; 
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this did not happen at all. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this root is of weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never if it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors:  
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is yellowing in color, or it is red, or black, or white and watery, and this happens more: 
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, and it appears long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own cloth, the abscess is covered with a piece of the egg, and for this reason they think that it is another egg; 
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white tunic, then one feels it well; 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, carefully probe the entire intro-mittor, because its form is as described above. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what then comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body; 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then he lies on his back, on a thing slightly high, and puts under him many cloths; 
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extend the instrument to one of the two ribs near the scrotum; 
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the head among their length until near the point of the elbow, and let your cut be straight when separating the skin of the head up to the white part, and gently peel it according to your power.  
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white part with water to the wide hole, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages, and cover the white part. 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the skin of the head, but only the white part; 
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut all or in parts evenly the edge of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return. 
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg sac were in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white part. 
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two books of the heart to one seam, then treat it like other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood. 
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the testicle to all the suspender, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches;  
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	so cut the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put more wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place the two cushions on top, and put doubled cloth above it, and tie it up over the whole linen according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and use wool padding according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching at the waist of the breeches, and one of the arms reaches over the foundation up to the back, and the other to the armpit part; 
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two sides over the two angles, and let the whole restraint be assembled at the waist of the breeches;  
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And at no time is this ramice of fire cautery a medicine in the place of an iron one, and it is that you take the cautery with a thin knife, and cut the skin of the cushions, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the water is exposed;  
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it in the manner as shown, and the eschar to this subtle cautery hot.  
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the cut in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything.  
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And guard that the fire does not touch the eye;  
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is more helpful; 
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And moving guards from the bloodletting and moves that the works of size;  
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if no thing makes you contrary, or abscess heals or bloodletting or another thing, so cure that which makes you contrary, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to endure this work for its horror, so administer perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that watery root is there, so make the patient sit upon the raised seat; 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess at the part below to all the spatula wide, and put the perforation through the long of the body; 
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the openings be wide, so that all the water runs out. 
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining water run out, then treat it until the wound is healed.  
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you should pour into it a pipe or the instrument used for draining the water from hydrophics, whose shape is described earlier; 
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled like before, and thus the patient will pass his days.  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the genitals
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many situations, for which I think it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; 
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by many causes.  
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to say by excess of sour and hot humors which are spread to the genitals, or from blows; 
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not find pain, and is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by adventure are some grievous abscesses pale and bloody, and of a dark color, and sometimes comes from the outside of an artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you should not touch it at all. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is made of the swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the feeling of the fingers, and one can well do the incision on this semblance, and on the other parts. 
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you cut the root of the cones, then being the egg on top, and the trail from the white this way, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the egg.  
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already soldered with these newly formed parts, then it is necessary that you pull out the egg, and cut it.  
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is in the way of the white, or what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that vein, and cut it roundly.   
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cartilage is or its rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are accomplished, then use the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then care for it with other cares until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the genitals
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope resembling the yolk, with the softening of the cones, and the patient moves badly when he goes.  
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the cure of this disease is as perilous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the genitals down to your two hands, over all the vessels which are near the penis, and hold them tight, and stretch them. 
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with the sharp spatula through the middle of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert an awl where there is the double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end; 
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then cure the wound like the others where one avoids bowing, so that no vessel spills which nourishes one of the corners; 
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by these there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come alive, it is necessary to drain the corners of all the vessels; 
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be aided. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The happenings of this ramic are thus by the section that comes or is placed there, or by the extension on the belly in the area of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners; 
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either where the section is, or from the extension of it, and these two ways of much cause:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or of percussion, or of jump, or of wrestling, or of lifting heavy loads, and similar things.  
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is of extension of the staff, if they have pock and pock, in long time, and come not suddenly.  
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and are the abscesses even until towards the middle, because the pus comes forward quickly with the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the skin, that it brings at the beginning a sudden pain, and there are diverse appearances of abscesses, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the skin.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are drawn into the wound, and are held in there, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, for which it behoves one to shun.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to bring the intestine into its place with his hand within the wound, if it can enter. 
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on its neck between your hands, and lift the hips; 
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the groin long;  
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the folds of the waist splints according to what you need to open the wound, and such that the pus may issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the pus that is beneath the skin of the groin, until the white pus is uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your two index fingers into that which follows the groin, where it is between the white pus that is beneath the skin of the buttock and between the second pus, and depart what is behind the buttock and between the second pus;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the hand to the right inside the heart of the coins, and are white siyac in high to your left hand, and lift the egg to all the siyac towards the waist; 
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister that he extend the egg on high, and untie those who are behind the binding; 
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and  ask at his two if he has any intestine enveloped or white siyac hard, and if you find nothing of that kind, put it in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle which has the thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the rear part of the siyac, which is after the skin of the coins; 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads; 
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the siyac, which we have said is below the skin of the coins, with a strong binding of two parts; 
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the shoulders with threads, and tie them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels which nourish them can enter within, except that an abscess may not come there. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread directly according to the first thread long two of that one, and after these two threads leave the said space which is below the heart of the bones the large one of a finger. 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears.  
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part which is below the skin of the bones, as much as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before.  
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the thread that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes is cauterized the whites as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the thread as long as it dries by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if he delays in healing, so it is to be raised with hot water, and put upon that which we have said, until it heals. 
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.  
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below. 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed;  
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, like we have said, and opens them;  
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not send any of the intestines into the groin, and if any come out, it is bad, and repair immediately;   
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, it believes the wound or syph, as far as the intestines descend. 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the syph which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells its parts and opens.  
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the cure for this is by cautery, as we have said before.  
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And at no time is it cured by iron in this manner: 
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And it is that the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture enflamed outward according to the quantity of three fingers; 
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the  suface which is beneath the skin that it follows, then take the rait and place it on the apparent place of the suface; 
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it at the end of the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the suface on the head of the rait, and sew the one and the other; 
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut the suface or extend the one nor another thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the root of the intestines; 
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then the cure by the treatment of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it is defaced and care for the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it is made to be seen. 
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then join the two edges with a suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin to three or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread. 
dou chastrement	Through chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that this chapter is commonplace in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book; 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and there are necessary for two manners: 
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the patient in their own words answer when they are asked, and by themselves seek treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to fasten certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and oxen and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	Therefore I say that fastening is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction, or by fenestration. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water, until the hooves are softened and pliable; 
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grasping them with your hand, until they are placed back and you no longer feel them.  
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the size fastening:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is fitting that you hold the animal, and press the leather of the hooves with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut above each hoof at the joint, when you have well scraped them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And I let none prick of the Syriac and the subtle Syriac which is on the vessels; 
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing remains of the parts, by which the beast desires lust; 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then care for the wound until it is healed.  
des hermofrodites	Of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men: 
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one if it is that between the two sexes appears also as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and about the nipple as well as a staff and they copulate.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care of the man and the woman is that you cut all the joined parts, and treat them like other wounds;  
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, men whose urine comes out through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A pimple is a lump attached on the natural part, so much it is ugly to see 
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have them as large as a hand, and that is their cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you squeeze the surplus of the pimple onto your hand or a cloth, and apply it lightly; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not squeeze too hard so that bleeding does not come out, then the cure of another cure until it is healed. 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And to another lump that is born at the mouth of the groin, and the employee, and by chance if it was hurt, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it in old times “cow disease”. 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cover it, as we have said the tendon, and the care until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the hole is small.  
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And is natural by birth, or accident by disease that comes from it. 
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is by the charm of the joint, or by the subtle or thick sinew, and is done from within in the joints, or in the ribs, or underneath, or wherever it may be. 
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And prevents conception, and childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And knowledge of these is by the regard of the bailiff. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stop is near appearing, then to the two or to the rail.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is subtle sinew, and it is near to the two books, then hast thou, and do thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, legs spread.  
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then form the two leaves, as long as the subtle one is rounded, and the stupefaction be over. 
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and have the woman lie down at home every day, so that she cannot move.   
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula seeming like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stupefaction is of flesh origin, then suspend it with the string and cut it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines that stanch blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of egg. 
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then administer a band of broad cloth so that the wound cannot close;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus it should remain long, and administer to her a tent of dry linen.  
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let other cures be done until he is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes new clay, then it should be covered in this manner, if it is not abscesses suppurating.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is in the flesh one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without court customarily, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tuberous. 
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said in the division the resemblances of those, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the boils, when they are brought in the marsh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless it is cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those who can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore it behooves you to place the woman in a cold house, then being the tuberous as tongs, and the cope at its roots, then powder on restraining medicines of blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then plunge her feet to the air an hour, then put her in cold water; 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if decorremens of blood comes, then let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galena and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and the confit with honey and aisil, and make an emplastrum on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays put, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If this does not work, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without striking. 
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.  
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess rests, care for the place with ointment until it is healed. 
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that one which is called "albathir" is red and similar to the bitter root, so it should be covered as I have said before. 
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then care for it until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the flesh, such as cancer and festering abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like the abscesses that are covered with a boil;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is angry at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let him suffer as long as the pain is appeased. 
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have small seats where he leans, and support his back and bring together his feet to the parts outside the leg; 
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen band;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then he brings the tail towards the right side, and there administers the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the channel, so that afterwards comes the form.  
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see him administering this instrument, that you first put in the tail so as to know the depth of the channel, so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; 
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the channel with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, with the spatula clean. 
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is emptied, it is necessary that you put in the wound damp lint in rose oil, or in green dry oil; 
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the lint away from the wound to the edge of the margin, and place outside over the margin and on the knife-sharp clean damp lint in water or mullein be cooked; 
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure after two days of oiling preceding these, as long as it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and no time raise the margin and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia be cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to oiling. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is put back in the flesh, then you must guard yourself from cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air;
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	therefore the child must hastily be moved by force  
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and is below his head, and the second with him. 
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his belly so that the child comes out quickly. 
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when he descends with his head, the second follows him, and is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification. 
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	Because it comes never with his feet, and comes by force on the body or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes on his belly, or groin, and is turned by chance on its neck, and by other bad figures. 
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes onto its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the one giving birth is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her. 
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and bring its natural oil or fennel to be boiled, and then put the bail between its thighs with the small spatula whose shape is here: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the secondine, and cut at its fingernail as long as the moisture which is within corrects;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema to the woman with flaxseed mucilage and sesame oil. 
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her sneeze and cough, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour;
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	then now extract the child. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly here and there. 
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on the chair, and raise her feet up.  
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then tip the chair over to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the tipping; 
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the elbow which was placed before, and extract the child, and reset it equally.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards. 
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it here and there, until it is equalized;  
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grab its feet and extend them here and there. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the hips, then command to grasp, and make it sneeze with condition;   
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it will be so, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, there must be treated lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come as we have seen, say that you take mullein of the herb, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; 
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the woman's body inside and outward this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs; 
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened below, say that you make her a collar of frankincense, and put it under, and leave it for an hour; 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on the stool, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the child is now coming out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, you put your hands on the child, patting it, patting it; 
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then let him be laid on his back, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on the bed.  
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And bend his hands palm to palm, and then take his hands above his belly, and remove the cushions from under him, until she is prepared downwards;  
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them forcefully, then move his belly upwards, then push with your hands;  
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and poke the child here and there; 
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instruct the woman to shave herself until the child is born. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out by a wide hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: 
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, have the woman get up and leave;  
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot leave, have her lie on the bed and uncross her legs. 
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then administer the concoction that I have recounted;   
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, have her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand. 
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And guide the child according to its natural form, and have her sneeze, and instruct her to shave herself until the child is born.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the issue of the child on its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife hold her hand, then poke it gently here and there,   
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, place on the nature of flesh, a little bit of oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little bit at a time. 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to pull herself up.  
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all of the spine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to being in this manner throughout the whole shoulder, strike the shoulder with your finger, until all moisture is gone.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child falls onto its face and neck, so that the head is not held up, the child will die.  
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to abstain from any movement: 
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will become lighter.  
de l’issue des gemelz	of the separation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and rarely three or four. 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, but it happens.  
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and rarely live, if they even name them; 
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and their severance is by the force which divides them, which is attached to the head;  
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out as naturally as one under, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out painfully, then treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does. 
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so that it may lead to health.  
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marsh I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its sage glorious, and it is necessary that the surgeon know all this, because by chance similar things happen; 
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if he does according to what is fitting.   
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death. 
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised. 
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister holds her from the sides, or she is tied to the bed so that she does not move during the descent of the child. 
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils with muskmallow and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and ointments.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them in the mother gently, then guide her where she puts the forceps so that they are suitable to it, and take care if the child is appearing that he descends upon his head. 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	so put the forceps in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or on her palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, so put it or prickle them at the middle ribs. 
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the awl in his right hand, and put the curve between the two fingers of the left hand, and thrust it with all his hand lightly, and stick the awl in any one of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty place; 
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the awl:  
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then stick it against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;  
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then put them equally in moving from one side to the other, so that it moves easily, and let the awls be toothed to hold well, as this is the form:  
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, anoint the bail with some oil in his fingers, and thrust them into that part, and draw the other part;  
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains none of it, put this one or higher up its place, and do so until it comes out completely. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must envelop it on the cloth, until it comes out completely. 
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cover it at the joint of the foot or on the knife, and thus you must do in the other hand, and as with II feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's shoulder is large and it is stuck in its exit, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the point;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can use the instrument that is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; 
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so likewise do if the child has a large head naturally; 
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps back and it is forced, so they are split, until the moisture which is there or worse comes out; 
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot exit, so cut it in pieces as much as you can;   
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the addressing to the mouth of the shaft is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract it with the hand enveloped in cloth;  
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and scrape the belly or the breast, until the moisture inside flows out; 
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are dislocated, and the head remains, then put the hand of the one who is performing it in their mouth, and pull it until the mouth of the skull. 
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts [it] back in one place or two, and the flesh heals. 
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the abscess is contracted because of the hot cautery that has come upon it, it does not need to be worked on, but rather one should administer moist and fatty things.  
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and [he] administers poultices, and wets with softening and moisturizing liquid. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the bone is on its rib, and you can put it straight, administer what we have said about a living child; 
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do that, then the flesh heals in pieces, and leave nothing of the second bone.  
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if it comes to an abscess or a boil that is in the flesh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, it should be put into restraining liquid, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and refused to give birth to the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time there came an abscess in the buttock, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to great purulence.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal, and I thought long about it, and could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it emerged one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound, and in my hands bones, until the woman was better. 
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I kept the woman long times thus, and it returned a little bit of strength from her. 
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter for those who, when they find a strange thing, that they may know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here after comes the form of the pressor, as it is written in the books; 
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to its turns as it has the shoulders of the two limbs.  
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; 
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the shaft be so wide, and the edge of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and among the two limbs be two adjustments of this same joint, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a bit more; 
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the furrow to open when one turns the two horns.  
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, somewhat more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers;  
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have at its two ends two adjustments, as you see, of one palm long and two in width.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the womb with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, the feet apart and the legs open, then put the two instruments adjusted together in the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs;  
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the womb, until the patient does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument are all superimposed, and are multiplied their appearances; 
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is more Hastings the work, and higher the men for their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument, so long as it is well equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is held back in childbirth, so it behooves that you command the patient that she retain her breath, and then make her sneeze of condiment, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it jumps for this, well is.  
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this does not happen, take a pot, and make it pierced or covered, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassoligine and centaury; 
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or any one of them, should be cooked or put in water on the fire;  
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a chain or pierced pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and keep it there until the vapors come out inside the marsh;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make him sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump the second joint violently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more force, command the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in a poultice of alum, and then put it into the vagina, and stir the second time.  
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, seize it and extend it piece by piece straightly, so that the veins do not break during extraction.  
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but then it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled. 
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and dislocates again.  
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the mare is narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs. 
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, then guard that you do not use the milk;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mare, you bind it to the hip of the woman, then clysterize with ointment tetra-pharmacon. 
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	so she will bear and put back, and come again;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nonetheless, when she bears, if it comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and pales the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So then it is necessary fumigations suitable for those:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have tested the fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument for which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the second is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like the appearance of a dog, and it sets the head subtly in nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; 
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be above the coals, and the tinder until it is burned out, and begin another one.  
de percier lou fondement	To examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but are stopped with subtle instruments.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it is fitting for the midwife that she pierce that instrument in its proper place and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the bandage so that it does not touch it; 
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then she puts on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment treatment until it is healed.  
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reset, put in a splint of wood, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And no time comes this stopping from a sudden wound or abscess
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover it tightly 
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if so cured, as we have said of the chain of plomb.  
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and greater than those that come near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more. 
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodule is old, if it works, and still moisture causes blisters or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas are pierced.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by those who have it or by the emission or windiness when the patient makes an emission, and by chance one jumps forward.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the half of the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach to the junction of the hip, and to the outside of the buttock.  
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing.  
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And that you insert your index finger or base, and thrust a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine cloth or horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or hair on your finger. 
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge coming through nor windiness nor pus, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	Know that it does not pierce. 
si te haste dou curer.	If you hasten to cure.  
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urinary tract, then the urine leaks out, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to its place. 
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the pain of inflammation is in the middle, then it is that there is a boil, and it does not require ointment or treatment. 
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these fistulas Persians have no cure except labor, and vanity of the fools who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined to his belly;  
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put an arrow tent or of lead if there is twisting, as long as you know where the boil comes from.  
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you must put your index finger there, and then feel if he can perceive it. 
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And be discovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then you know that she is present. 
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not work and one cannot heal her.  
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said nonetheless that one can heal them well, but this happens rarely. 
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid that one does to it, is if one heats the subtle cautery according to the wideness of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And puts it whole hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation. 
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these fleshy strands are burned, which are seeming to an eye feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then the cure of moist cloths in butter, until that flesh is issued, then the cure of ointment closing and joining flesh. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, then well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, otherwise cannot be healed; 
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent enters, and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or  syfac, and you see the fistula at this following the covering of the heart; 
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push ahead before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it comes to the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And will be delivered the tent, and will seek out; 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then  examine those ones that seem like a feather of an owl, and remain nothing from them. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound gets worse, and goes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles II good things: 
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; 
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in crushed things, as long as the wounds are low and if the joined ones have burned to the bottom. 
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then  cure the wound of sudden swellings by means of hard joined things, and they are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the very bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should probe its opening and examine it carefully.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between II there is the cloth or the  syfac or joined things, or where it is near to breaking through, if there is no other way than a path of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the III manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent and cure it as before; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in cutting, so that you do not cut the base which holds the foundation, and let the secretions come by its natural will; 
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure it as we have said. 
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound since it is cut near its foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse the foul matter which is in the wound, as much as you can. 
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	so it is a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner:  
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is or cost by the foundation against the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: 
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts the thread twisted in it, and puts the tent to all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is placed in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that one pierced, as you put your dough or foundation; 
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and carry the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and bind them to each other, and leave it one day or two; 
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no longer until the threads catch these characters which are between two, and shrink; 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound until it is soldered and healed.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make a ligature cover so when it is made, and then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very much a one part and trenching; 
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here: 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhages are according to II manners:  
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are inside the foundation, as much as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short close blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation;  
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are outside have little moisture, and in short one or a little bit of water clear or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch for them to go in rooms, as long as the foundations are sore, and they appear the children; 
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and can hold it with pincers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots. 
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the forceps cannot hold it because of its moisture, then take it with a cloth, or with cotton, or with a piece of felt. 
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And hold it with your fingers, then cut it, and put hot powders above it in place of cautery;  
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize it as is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure it with other cures until it is healed; 
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the base cannot come out, then enema the patient with a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the base so that it can come out openly; 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	But if the patient resists, and if the threads are too thick from the base, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:  
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then lead the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so be wide; 
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one open to correct the superfluity of blood; 
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it until they weep, and when they are dry, care for them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there happens drying of humors in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works there.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you cauterize the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above it, so that it does not get moist. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then care for it until it is healed as necessary.  
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is well-scraped.  
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	from shaking
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small appearance of pus before the body, and it goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it like death from chill, and it comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather, or a very strong vulture feather, and put that cane on the wound, until the purple circles tinge the wound all around.  
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand over the entire cane until you cover the whole wound, and place it in place, and scrape the wound from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so do this of a serpent of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not let it pierce, for to hold at the joint, and press.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, then cauterize the wound, as it is in front or chapter of cautery. 
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	At times one does a clyster of silver or lead, or molten iron or mesh;  
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and at times one does these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore who are administered to in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster small and great is above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside. 
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And on one of the ribs II is pierced, and on the other I; 
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And the belly is where one puts medicines in a bladder of animal or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be some space, then put into these holes I thread strong thread twisted in X or however around, and assemble the belly like a kid; 
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with strong thread, then administer an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then put it in gently; 
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister with his two hands together, until it is all visible, then remove the blister, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to pass, then pull on the skin as much as he can 
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night flat, then it is more help.  
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat it with a disorder of the belly and the medicine hastily issues from there, repeat it until it is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be stretched:  
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division the cure of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will tell you the cures for hands and medicine, according to completion. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the blow of a stone, and the cut of a sword and knife, or of a spear or club or arrow, or similar things; 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members. 
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, for remembrance will come in its chapter.  
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly of an abscess hot: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it should happen to be bled promptly from the cephalic vein even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the contrary side of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats.  
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, let him lessen his meat, and drink no wine, nor eat much of meat.  
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in ptisana wine.  
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the artist has moved it, put some ointment on it, until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then bring them together by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone, and hanging, and only holds by a bit, then cut it;   
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then cure the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as beef and wheat bread, as well as pulses, and similar things.  
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw away the pus, then cure it;  
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; 
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: 
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and that you put in this powder which joins as if the fire had healed it.  
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is: 
pren encens une partie;	Take incense one part; 
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;  
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; 
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then dress it well, and leave it undisturbed, if it does not swell;   
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one removes the medicine only when it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no times is this done with just chalks, when one does not have incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the fire has closed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has already healed the wound, even if it is still inflamed, put no powder in it; 
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some dressings digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it swells. 
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other wounds until it is healed.  
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers. 
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you afterwards about fractures of the head.  
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and the other of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a nerve, there is no other thing to do but leave the wound alone and put nothing in to restrain it, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat. 
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.  
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, such as calf washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cuckoo's flower also washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist dressings.   
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so the side and tie with bandages, then care until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and full of pus, pierce or lower than that. 
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding comes, then stop it with a ligature, and bandage it, and cauterize it as is necessary.  
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe and the conduit is kept, so that the flesh goes, stitch the heart on top of the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.  
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then restrain it properly, and leave it for some days, then cure it with medicinal ointments until it is healed.  
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cover it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, then try to remove all of them as best you can, and what you cannot have, leave it until the wound is rotten, and be careful and apply a splint.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder on top of the powder that I said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look if from the wound there arises windiness as the patient breathes: 
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then know that the wound is mortal. 
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain deep, and return to the heart, and kill the patient. 
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But put attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day:
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there come not spasms, nor evil trembling of heart nor straining of the arm; 
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved.  
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat therefore with tents and other treatments, as long as it is sound; 
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and works, then you know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	treat it as one must. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat it as above. 
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, sew it together;  
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are loose. 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not removed, let the wound fester, so it will lighten the extractions. 
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other members, judgment is made as we have said.  
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; 
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines protrude, so by which the intrusion of others occurs;  
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, for that reason it is put back in more carefully, if one does not put them in hot to hot. 
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they go back in more carefully, and for that reason the middle wound is worse, for that reason one must reset the intestine to its place like the others. 
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly is according to IV manners. 
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of the other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds. 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has come out, and it is a thing to be put back together, this is by one of the two manners. 
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Half an sponge or I soft cloth in boiling water only, or you cook it in boiling water adding juniper and pepper, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And sometimes this wind restraining is done, and it moves only so that it deflates. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling departing, moisten the intestine with water or wine and herbs be cooked, because by these is aligned the entrance to little things. 
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are treated. 
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first cure is to move it that it be cut, that one should not cut it without great necessity being there.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument for splitting it. 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	So cut inward at the curve and outward not, and see here the form.  
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, put them back in their natural form in their proper place if you are able, for this is valuable to heal.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, it behooves you that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, place the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to that the sunken part be higher than the other. 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds put what you have appeared, then have between your hands the minister pitiful who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; 
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one part of space, and there pierce a needle where there is the good strong thread;  
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the fascia, which is below the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two heads of the fascia the four together; 
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then the strain of a double thread around the needle of one part, then assembles the two ends of the wound together, and then leaves the space of two fingers, and there it puts another needle;  
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then the thread of the needle like you have done the first one, and do not cease doing so according to what you need the needles, until all the wound is restrained;  
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason it is necessary that they are medium-sized; 
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; 
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on the ends of the needles for them to remain in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.  
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this way of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two are used there. 
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of the fascia together with a needle through which passes a strong medium thread. 
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced these four pieces together, you move the needle back to where you began, in the manner one sews fabrics.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a man's finger. 
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch belongs to a man, and I sutured a wound that one man had on his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and it protruded from the intestines well two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.  
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I cured him, and he was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; 
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put more than twice a day fresh cotton on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and thrust it from the outside part to the inside. 
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the right heart straight through, then lay the head on the side of the scalp where you thrust the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside. 
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave the scalp on one side, and take it back on the other, until the suture is entirely completed. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suturing, as Galens states properly, is like any one who joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one side of the scalp to the other side, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle or head of the scalpel near it, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two sides of the scalp. 
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part until the inside one, just like two shoulders.  
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make it pierce both from the outside part until the inside one, in two other shoulders of the miracle that are on the other side.  
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common and usual way to suture. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	The Gauls say this word thus, and no one testifies it, it is necessary to sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each. 
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must thrust one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.  
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than in the other parts of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgements of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: 
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the artery has moved, then put back the intestine and sew it up.  
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on powder of ginger and if the artery has been moved, put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound weeps. 
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew up the threads, and let the sides be joined together, and the stitch.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed. 
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to weep, old cotton, and move it two times a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you do not need other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not make connection with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the buttocks.  
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his bowels, and this happens many times, then administer enemas of black wine, and even if the putrefaction comes to the intestine. 
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.  
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the proximity of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back in as if it were the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become maggot-ridden or black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that no bleeding comes from there, because there are veins and arteries. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut that which is between the ligaments, and place the two heads during from below the wound to outside in order to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some people, because I saw that one man was pierced or belly of a lance; 
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and became a fistula, and through it came excrement and flatulence; 
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put it under treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to sweat until it was healed, and the ends were closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it closing, I doubted that the patient would have ill in his belly; 
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take strips of cloth with large threads, then assemble the edges of the wound, and when the strip covers the mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it pulls its mouth upwards; 
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the head with cloth, so that it cannot be untied, then put another strip after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely enclosed; 
et cout la plaie.	and sew the wound.  
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	This method is used for wounds in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:  
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very smooth, and then tie it to the head of a fine linen thread twisted together, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the opening; 
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching with threads is not against the way of faith and hope; 
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the lower intestines, there is nothing to be done except subtlety; 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is healed and turned inwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white node which one does not feel pain in, and is also shaped like the feather of a bird; 
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it appears clear and thin, and other times thick. 
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and other times quite large; 
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only by one of the IX causes: 
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, because of the little blood or flesh; 
ou por sa malice;	or for its wickedness; 
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to be born;  
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much bulge; 
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or where the wound is poor, and the matter is of bad quality;  
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the cure; 
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is of a pestilential manner;  
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is slow to digestion, and late to healing, and inflated by nature; 
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or where there are veins or bones;  
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to tell you the cure of a fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; 
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet. 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is one that comes to the property of the main limb, and similar parts.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only toil and ignorance. 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not come up to where I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you will. 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is crooked, then make a circle of a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends easily to the twists and turns.  
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula is opened by hand and you cannot easily search it with tents, then clench it through one of the openings, because moisture flows from one opening to another, and cleanses it.  
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then carefully probe with your power that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is covered by membrane, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and where he feels it. 
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you will truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the pus and corrupted matter that are inside; 
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut into it as much as you can, then put moistened tents in a medicinal ointment, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is at the bottom; 
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he puts ointment for healing flesh until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then  scrape it as long as all the corruption is removed, then treat with healing things as long as it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and returns like before, know that you have not gone as far as should be done;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If it is open and you wish as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place; 
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is nothing else but to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with tweezers, then extract it with the instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none. 
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut and remove both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something preventing rot, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed; 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then set only so much as the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound. 
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes right up to the flesh of the bone; 
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is necessary to be and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.  
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to the man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work.  
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for opening; 
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the wounds by their folly work so much that the abscesses open and they corrupt much of matter, and become fistula, and there came much pus that all lying bowed and moist from the body;  
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many wounds they did care for over II years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I came to them called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what corrupted by pus to great corruption; 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and becoming red the body of the youth, and had a color of citron.  
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these pits, and then searched all the pits, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hastened, and dug into one of the pits until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inside bone. 
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was certain that what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I had removed; 
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with hot medicinal poultices for a long time, and could not heal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then tried to solder the place; 
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not heal until I dug around a palm's breadth of the bone, and found it entirely rotten. Then I restored it with medicines; 
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And he was healed and joined soundly, and it did not again become necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him.  
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but it was cured completely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was well-disposed and did not have any inconvenience or contrary at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it should be treated in this manner: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take a linen cloth and strain it at the head of the bone that is open, and command any one to extend it upwards. 
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And put another linen cloth, thicker than the first one, and tie it over the skin that is above the bone, and extend the head upwards so that you pull the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh in the place where you wish to be, so that the bone does not bleach the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a piece of wood or a board under the bone so as to completely cover the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again other times.  
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely. 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put the charcoal underneath, and then take it from one part to the other of the corruption, and be the ligature of the long end of the corruption by a point, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and be the bone where it contains on the other side.  
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to cut.   
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is or in the finger of the hand, or or in the finger of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corruption, how it opens to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not hinder you.  
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.   
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each kind of work with its instrument; 
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases.  
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so consider the instrument which you need according to this.   
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can be dislocated by means of internal or external causes;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you will have medicated that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes through this from death, or from malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb. 
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems that it is burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes the corrosion of limb to limb, and takes hold throughout the body; 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to cut it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cut it off, and do not give him any space to come until his hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm; 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow.  
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy left except the quantity of its virtue; 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and so do all this when the corrosion comes or pit:  
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint; 
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes at a pit, then cut all the pit;  
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then cut at the knee joint; 
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to death.  
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister to one of the bonds below, and another minister to the other bond above, and you sever the flesh which is between the two bonds at a spatula wide, as far as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or saw, and put on each side the drapery of linen so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess chaus. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place diligently, or put on some restraining powders;  
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is completed, then tie the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed; 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I shall tell you that it happened to a man in his foot:  
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel of his foot, until it consumed the whole foot; 
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that the corrosion returned in his heel of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things to counteract it after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion. 
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it would be that I might grasp his hand, and I do not want, that I have hope of rejoining the matter;  
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubt also that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the virtue of man was weak;  
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; 
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have this story related only for that reason if one needs it to do otherwise.  
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;   
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and out comes the pus, and remains in its place like a vessel;   
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above it is also as subtle as fine linen, and does not break until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula";   
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone by force, it is called "fistula"; 
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a cloth; 
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not let it be treated for its corruption.  
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are convinced that the skin is hardening and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it with a clyster like this:  
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the chest is large and the part inside it has a foul smell, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: 
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take equal amounts of ashes, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey; 
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to your need, and make it in sharp and honey, and in a clyster the breast, and restrain the wound; 
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.  
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breasts are softened and the pain is gone; 
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and at no time is it clystered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them, then let it drain, and in the clyster until you know that the breasts are well softened. 
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey or where there is a pinch of litharge ground.  
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes it breathe. 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the bowels are well purified, then cleanse it with what causes stool to emerge from them, and make a plaster of diaphinite, and make it with rose oil and wine; 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the chest is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, enlarge it with an iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged. 
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so let it be left only as much as the clyster can enter, and if the opening that lies above is lower, so cover or raise it as high as it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in place, let no flesh enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, so arrange it in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest point where it is, for when the bowel is in place, let no flesh enter and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, so arrange it in such a manner: 
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	That the bowel move gently down, and leave nothing of the bowel. 
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy part, and be on the linen sheet that covers the whole wound.  
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cope as forces to the opening of the breast which is more wide than the first, then ointment be put on the other sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the wound of the healthy part to align the bowel, and do not remove the large sheet outside except after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And he who is on the opening of the breast, often remove to remove the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, if it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested. 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine is in such a manner extended and you see nature that rises on the wound of the healthy part, then know that the breasts are now healing, and approaching health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then you untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, if it does not make you despair of health, for the cure is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who delay healing of flesh in their wounds, and some that do the opposite.  
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and he bows indigestion from his chest after many days, knowing that the breast does not heal. 
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is slow to heal and is pulled away, he applies medicines drying moisture in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaconite, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy.  
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance.   
puis le confit et en use;	then boil it and use it.  
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And that same thing is best cooked with honey, when the definition of an offering isn't present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey while it is over the fire. 
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then in a cloth you wrap it, and the one placed over the chest, and sometimes it administers an aristolochia long, and roots of lilies celestial, which is also like flour of beans and centaury. 
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in use of simple or of composites:  
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I said, and use it; 
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the cure is prolonged, and isn't cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the care of the fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panacea is an abscess that arises from under the knuckle of the hand, or the foot, or perhaps arises in other places. 
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes forth, and runs and hollows out a furrow until it runs to the root of the knuckle, and perhaps runs the whole way through. 
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corruption comes to the bone, so that there is fetid pain, and the joint of the limb becomes wide, and the color is foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity which is remaining from the bone, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the knuckle is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the knuckle after the flesh heals, and it begins to prick, and to blush, then it is necessary that you put the root under the knuckle that pricks, and drive it upward, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put upon the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all. 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the care of dressings until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it, because as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal. 
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the two [bones] corrode, cut them in one as it was said before, then the care until it is healed. 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken and bruised, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the [bone] with a sharp spatula by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the bone, because the patient would feel too much pain; 
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.  
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	One who is born in any knot of the two does not move, and one who is born at the joint of the two, perhaps moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: 
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a wide spatula.  
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is hard to cure: 
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold him down to cover.  
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must at the back of our, it is fitting that you cut first the flesh roundabout until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable length for him, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The blows that come to two joined together come by birth, or by binding of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you cover that suture so that it may heal according to its natural forms; 
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil so that they do not stick together; 
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of fine lead until the skin is joined, as it befits.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it happens to come together with the palm of any of its hands, bind that suture as is fitting.
des vils	of villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are thick enclosures full of melancholic superfluities that come into many limbs of the body; 
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they more often happen in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer to him once purging of col, and then the health of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of iron is according to II manners: 
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they are cut open, and blood is drawn out black.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you cut open the vein and drain it completely. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, the leg is immersed in very hot water, until the large vein is soft, then the leg of the patient is strained from above the hip to the part below the knee; 
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in this place, or in II or in III, with a wide blade, then empty and completely drain the black blood from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the illness can withstand;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then to the wound, and command him to apply a poultice of black pitch.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resume bleeding and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harming the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevation of this is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut the place of the vein from the top of the knee, or in the part below to the ankle; 
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with an instrument, and scarify the vein on both sides, until it appears when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; 
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then put the razor underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it lightly on the incision, then cut into the other place above III times. 
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the point, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first. 
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the point of the foot, then scrape and lift until the second incision. 
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it piece by piece, until it is all pulled out, then cut. 
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot scrape and lift it, then insert a needle into the whole thread strong and doubled, and tie and scrape it, and insert it below the razor, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is pulled out. 
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it comes to a nuisance for the patient. 
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated it fully, put on top of the wound's place wool soaked in wine and rose oil; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.  
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enclosed together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twistedly, but do not break it;  
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.   
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;  
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:  
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is established in legs, in hot parts where it does not grow herbs nor tree, and in earth where there is no moisture; 
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it may be born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body serpent and worms, lodged between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to burst forth, as if a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time he is in pain outside, then wrap again around the plank, and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely out. 
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, then it goes back into the flesh, and brings an abscess and rot there, and bad disease.  
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore for this reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and that nothing remains in the body.   
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of long, or of X, and one fellow came to me once, whose vein was X palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out I rays or threads, and pierces it to the bottom so that all in goes;  
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let it be emptied of the material which is inside, and administer to its place medicines preventing corruption any day, then cure it as the abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes in this vein many rains, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much of threads, and from which it leaps rains; 
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure then as we have said before.  
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "disease of ox" because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes all over the body going up and down, and it is felt well at the turn of limb to limb, until they reach the skin where it goes, and leaps forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is endangered by putrefaction of some humors, such as come worms and vermin and ascarides in the belly; 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye;  
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and milked, then one cannot help but when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so it behoves you to tie the place above and below with a strong ligature tightly, then cut above and milk out the pus, and if the worm is driven deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; 
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;  
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold under it a formed eyebrow then cut above, and drive the treatment. 
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicine soluble for the bad humors corrupted, and avoid from meats causing rot. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vakir," and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and discovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I after, saw it rise as well as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if alive silver when it cuts from its place to another; 
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a little after it corrodes throughout the body, until she came to the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that she was turning around her body, as I saw her. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted it that they might move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it so, as I saw it in the woman. 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was for this reason that the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered, and for this appeared that constrained windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then lay it above and below carefully, and then cut up until that constrained windiness from its place emerges.  
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place. 
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it with those who treat the wind ailments, such as fetid pills and pills of serpent and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and soldered.  
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And those which fall in any member they fall according to two manners:  
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: 
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then it is necessary that you refrain from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases.  
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely in place, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syvface which is above the brain, is when scotomy and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without a furor from the nostrils, or from the ears;  
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it loses the speech and voice; 
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from the wound moisture white seeming to poultice, and leaps also as bruise of flesh;   
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in place.   
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the seven when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the seven moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood comes, and cold sweat, and syncope: 
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know then without doubt that death is coming.  
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that does not come out is that without plains of foam jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the seven falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; 
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing;  
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the limbs of the shoulders. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls or stomach, perchance it leaps from the wound any thing of the undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and in a no point of fiber by the intestine route, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the seven falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.  
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and necks and throat and shoulder and helper and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you may do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man with an arrow in the root of his nose: 
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and pulled it from another side under the ear fat, and he was healed without feeling much pain. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And  I pulled out an arrow that had stuck in the fat of the eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow,  all light iron without ears. 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The man was healed, and he suffered no bad consequences. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears: 
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I softened its barbs, and carefully pulled it out until I reached the end, and the Christian was healed.  
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And treat an arrow to the man, who was wounded in the chest or belly, and thought he would die; 
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then that after passing XXX days, his condition did not improve;  
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow and extracted it, and treated him further, and there was no bad outcome. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see the man who had an arrow strike his back, and the wound closed above;  
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural disposition, nor finds inconvenience in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man who had an arrow strike his face, and the wound closed; 
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remains so without suffering much pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.  
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treat an arrow to the man of the princes the king, who was wounded in his side, and was slightly declining on the right side; 
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was entirely pulled out. 
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to care for him after three days had passed.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I took hold of it with all my skill, and felt nothing at all. 
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pricking and pain below his right ear.  
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put a plaster of soothing and digestive herbs on top, because the ears did not swell.  
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the ears of the arrow appeared. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on again for a few days, and it closed the wound directly, and the patient stayed like that for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; 
et il le me dist.	and he told me so.  
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound a caustic medication for a few days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which was hardening in place. 
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I placed in the opening of the wound by that medicine sharp, as long as the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; 
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it pierced well the ends for IV months, and then I widened so the wound that I put in pliers, and my on one side and the other, and it could not escape; 
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	therefore I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took on the day pliers well made, according to those that its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the wise judges that cartilage of the nose cannot restore: 
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I therefore restored it, and the wound was joined, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, for the books cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare to a great thing, and to those that are present and failing, find new work, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows are not from members where they are fixed further than according to two manners: 
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part; 
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that one which is further by the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into their flesh, and never has been any other time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not now exit, let it remain as long as the flesh is pulled inwards and the exit is loosened; 
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone and cannot exit, let it remain so for some days, and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and therefore she leaps, and if she does not leap, then pierce around the entire forest subtly, until the forest around is enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: 
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not treat it, but leave it as long as it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes up to the sinus, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only lodged in the bone and does not come up to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without ill effect, then the instrument of extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot be pulled out further, then administer tarantulas around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the wound until it is healed. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it with all your might;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then treat it with a suitable instrument. 
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then cut as much as the wound is large.  
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to which it is attached, remove the flesh that is stuck on either side as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And be careful that you do not break the arrow, but that you pull it out more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then let him lay until his leg is soft, then treat it, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And guard against the incision of the nerve and vein, and put everything as much as you can to pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently. 
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and set the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow struck it, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do so, put it according to what the signs show you.  
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees or feels nothing apparent, or the skin is swollen in place: 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then below, as much as the tongs can take, and then extract it:  
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held within the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then treat it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.   
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is in there, put out the whole shaft; 
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft has broken off, and you see administer pounding, you administer the instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument:  
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then thrust forward, and if the arrow is broken, put the pointed instrument inside, to ease extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as it is proper.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow lies in the thigh or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it, then cut it. 
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and keep from cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary. 
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and tend to the wound until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of pliers used to treat arrows resembles an eye's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways of doing this:  
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed arrow is like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the shaft, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers to push and to know if it is here.
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one heals, so it has sixteen heads, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	two bats behind the ears, which are called the two "herbes"; 
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear; 
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, which are called "aspirates";  
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; 
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the neck; 
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two veins that are in the throat; 
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the upper lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; 
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins of which one commonly finds five in each arm: 
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and is from the inner side of the elbow, and the common people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fascia" and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; 
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilica is where the right rib is, and they call it by the common people "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossil, and it is the one that we drain, which opens clearly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saphenous vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and there are two of them. 
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the pouch of the left rib, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle of the right rib.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side. 
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	Draining the veins that are after the ears helps with old cataracts and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth.  
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck to a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their places depending on the head. 
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then where you feel your pulse below your shoulder, feel for it there too.  
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet and thrust it below the vein to the bone, then raise your hand over the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and vein well at their intersection, and let blood flow out as much as you see.  
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and tie it, until it is healed; 
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.  
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for old migraine, and sudden, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of the eyes' sharp tears.   
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of bloodletting are as I say:  
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly; 
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below his ear, and then he should direct (the bloodletting);
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then raise the heart above the vein on high with your index finger, and thrust the lancet beneath, and lift the vein upward, and cut it, as you have done with other veins, and make correction of blood according to your need. 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then untie the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; 
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then the scab forms, and let it remain until it is healed.  
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The blood from the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the blood from the cephalic vein for old facial ailments, and migraines, and redness; 
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; 
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "digger," whose form is:  
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and never do the work with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, it does not behoove for the flames to be too strong. 
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the healthy tissue be scorched, because the bone is near and by chance the flames break when they are subtle.  
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healthy tissue of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps the eyes, and the head, and the throat, and the root in the eye, and the diseases of the face; 
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the qualities of their healthy tissue are that the patient strains their neck by twisting from any linen, as before; 
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy tissue, and whether it be the healthy tissue through the traverse, a little of the long of the flame a little wide, because there is no flesh.  
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break. 
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a cut of blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it well.  
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein of the arm is good for fever and for sore throat, and for diseases of the face, like migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old. 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the qualities of the blood is that the patient constricts his neck, then draws his arm to his left hand, and takes a fine long thread, and puts it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let it go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the thread:  
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two armpits helps with the easing of the breast, and for inflammation, and for many diseases, and for gangrene, and for corrosions, and for herpetic ulcers,  
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient restrains their neck below on both sides, as we have said.  
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein in the long place a little widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much is needed. 
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and restrain both veins moderately so that the patient doesn't strangle.  
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the veins of the books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins above the lips helps in healing wounds inside the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and to sores and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain their neck as I have said. 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side, and recognize them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins. 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is at the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of the bleeder is that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein: 
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore bleed one and the other, and do not go too far into them, because below are the arteries.  
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm which we commonly bleed are bled according to two manners: 
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they prick at all flame martin broad, or olive subtle as you hear trenching, and it is called "ancil";  
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and the narrowing of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame martin is very well known, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary for opening the deep veins plain of thick blood appearing, and that contain thick and troubled blood;  
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so aids the sicknesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly; 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the lancet to cut wisely, and that he avoid the artery which is below.  
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it cuts the artery, and a torrent of blood comes, then it must be stopped as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame must not be pricking but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil doesn't open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it and change another.  
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you wish no vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: 
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly. 
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cup to the knife like we have said.  
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary thus that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse;  
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the knife. 
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is of the artery.  
eschui la donques.	Then follows. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise up also like the urine of a child, and its color is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: 
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your hand lengthwise on top of it, then remove your hand if the flow stops, which often happens;  
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	if the arm is bleeding, and let it be so, and do not move it for the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be wary, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the flow does not stop, and it is bothering you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the retraction; 
et estainche li sans.	and stop the blood flow. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a strip of licorice, and make it, and take one of the halves and tie it well up to the other day. 
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the skin is stretched, it is good. 
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stretch the skin.  
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stretching is not grieved in more positions for the small place of the wound, and the possession of the arm's bond. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle helps so much that it treats blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said. 
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it befits the surgeon that he place himself near the nerve which is below, and if he does not go too deep, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wounds are grazed, and perhaps cannot heal; 
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then you must clean it with the anointing instrument. 
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And push the nerve to your power.  
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cephalic vein's draining helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes; 
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to drain by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because that one is the most safe of all veins, for it does not have a nerve nor artery.  
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not grieve if one must try the first time, and one tries again. 
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by adventure it swells the eyes in some men, as soon as one tries the first time, but it does not cause any harm. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about healing, is that bleeding is administered only to preserve health, and to avoid future diseases. 
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are or cotte:  
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one must bleed at the beginning of Lent, in spring and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears. 
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must bleed the first day or third day, after two hours or three days.  
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of the day or of the night, at all hours and in all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying for more than the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not bleed those who have passed sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some wants to bleed, in any manner that it may be, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a light clyster, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful fluids to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor does one bleed well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as he is, nor the dropsy-stricken. 
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and worse still to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiple of labor in women, and childbirth, and vigil, and fasting, and that which totally the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then purify the humors, if he is thick with meats and drinks and medicines, if you have his permission for it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then between baths, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood, and heal from the vein of the arm or the third part (of the body), as we have said. 
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep yourself on that day from labor, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;  
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be lying and joyful, and let the  shoulders be higher than him who is healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then restrain the linen on top in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct it without a surgeon. 
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.  
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the shoulders with a little bit of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand above that vein below the armpit one finger's breadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not go and fail to be pierced. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that are as taut as cords in the body, and some that are full of airiness, so that when one puts the flame upon them, they withdraw from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some of these; 
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if they open the vein, the wound is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these matters. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then it begins again a little below that place or where it has been opened, if the place is not inflamed.  
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the place is inflamed, and the patient fears it, then let him leave it for a day or two, and not tie up his arm: 
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	for by chance there may come boils or abscesses.  
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into a bath, then restart the bleeding if he wishes. 
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is small, or the vessel is subtle and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then pierce in that same wound all the way straight through. 
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And put a point gently, so that the veins are swollen.  
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this happens many times when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, then do not restart the bleeding, and put on a bit of oil dressing, because it stops the body from bleeding, and is good for this wound.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the paste of oil to each vein that you open, to stop the flow of blood. 
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same thing is done with a triangle and a bow, when it is placed over the place; 
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so that it shrinks the veins and spreads apart when it is too large.  
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if it comes to an abscess that grows large, which happens often, even when it is only opened once and the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put a sponge soaked in water and salt on it, lukewarm, and hold it for one hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or discoloration, it will not harm him; 
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on nothing of aloes or frankincense, mixed with juice of calamus, mintwort, or the like. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times abscesses and appearances appear at the basilica of the saint. 
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance evil.  
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, I warn you not to put anything on it of what we have said, because by chance it may cut off the artery.  
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but the wound should be bandaged dry to harden the place, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it seep out until it is red.  
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it growing large, let it remain until it subsides. 
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too swollen, let it cool down.   
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for him who is pale and thin, and needs the extraction of blood, one makes a larger wound, and let the flames be wide. 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And to one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking. 
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bleeding is safe from the decrease of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than the bleeding done long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to one whose body needs bloodletting, it is fitting to give soft bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is heated, treat him with bloodletting three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, let him eat soft bread dipped in mucid syrup, or in honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it bleeds at the vein, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup subtle, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to empty his arm after the first vein is opened, and he has a strong body, so it will heal seven hours after the first opening, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	Because he has much blood within the body that is already heated, and brings fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to drain a great quantity, and widen the opening until it reaches the bone.  
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then that you fulfill all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come to him from bone, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent. 
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated and to make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard upon it.  
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is crooked, let him extend his arm fully, because this would be bad; 
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him leave it so until he heals the second time.  
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you point it to the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and place upon his fingernail returned sharp, and press lightly.   
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity is to draw blood a second time, if the vein in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the cauterizing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the bone is red. 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then cauterize it now through, neither too wide nor too long; 
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the opening be wide, and cauterize well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, put the hand back in hot water, and leave it to bleed in the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more there in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the cauterizing of this vein is safer of all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The cauterizing of the salvation vein on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: 
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Restrain the hand, and put it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if one can see it. 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it completely off entirely, if it causes no harm;  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not pierce it too much, for the nerves are all beneath the skin, and then put the hand in hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot be pulled out.  
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put on the vein oil and wool to close it tightly, and do this with each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of him in the left hand is as good for the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the belly, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of its healing are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it softens, and binds above the joint of the foot;  
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins; 
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So heal there, in the larger vein or at the ankle, whichever is worth more.  
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it upon the foot, guard the nerves that are below, and heal by traversing also as in cutting; 
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be gentle.  
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the vein cannot be issued forth, put the foot in water again, and let it bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing fails the first time, begin again the second at a point above, because the flesh is salty;  
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and in this way do from the other foot equally.   
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle of the leg, and its pain reaches to the hip when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of its healing are that the patient enters hot water, and is stretched above the ankle IV times in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.  
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, heal it in every way that you can, and by traversing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it, because the flesh is dry, and it is much well-supplied with blood of men. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, so search any vein of him who opens or back of the foot, and towards the small thigh, and guard the nerves. 
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much bloodletting as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and restrain.  
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.  
des sainies de ventouse	of the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suctions are made of horns, or of skin, or of glass; 
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and suctioning is done in two ways:   
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suctioning which is without pricking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with fire, or without fire;  
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and suctioning which is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head;  
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others is removed the neck; 
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others in the ribs of the neck; 
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass below the chin;  
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping glass on the shoulders;  
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass on the hips; 
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses removed from the arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses from the legs; 
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses from the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cupping does not treat blood but rather the small veins that are spread throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken as much as opening a vein;  
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not appropriate to administer it with heat or cold fire in any illness that comes from repletion until the whole body is emptied.   
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to blow up, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time. 
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they have need to blow up, have heavy heads;  
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who have fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; 
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bite their tongues.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are some who dream, and see by blood and numbness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and even when it is gone for one month, we order them to vomit after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The vein of the temple helps in the greatness of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper that this be done after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it does not become those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a catarrh, because this causes them great discomfort. 
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason it does not become the elderly in use, nor those who have or cold diseases.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the neck is in place of bloodletting of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the alleviation of the pain, and for cutting open the channel of the pharynx, and for all, and for repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should not be applied too strongly, because if it is held too tightly, it may cause blockage in the stomach and heart.  
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation at the two costals of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of bloodletting of the basilica.  
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you command the healthy one that he press his hand when putting it, so that he does not cut the artery, and that there comes no flow of blood. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The incisions under the chin are good for mouth sickness, and gum rot, and similar illnesses which are in the mouth. 
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and are in the place of the veins of the two lips.   
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The incisions on the arms are as useful as the three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from those large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the patient not to pull too much on it, for the skin is bare and shows nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction cup that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the base, and diseases below, and it should be large and made of brass, so it needs to draw well; 
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were thin, it would break;  
et i fai grans plaies.	and this makes great wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Suction cups on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the hips, groin, and bladder, and loosen up the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in place at the two shoulders, and the two ankles, and all ways they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many positions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this, until you see the skin red and inflamed, and appears the red color of blood. 
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then firmly, and reapply the suction cups, and take heed to the position of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores: 
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	so it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep incision; 
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.  
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to cut twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtilily open the vein of blood thick. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the vein is very thick, then it behooves to cut a third time;  
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw blood little by little, then we suffice with only one incision. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we frequently repeat the incisions;  
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the vein is thick, we pierce it in full force, and the end that the keyers be pierced very strongly, and it behoves the one who has coarse and hardened skin, and whose pores are closed, that you apply to their leus suction cups of oil appetizing and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of oil from pumpkin seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in summer, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or something similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of wormwood, or of balm, or of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom one heals has tender flesh and large pores, there is no need to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after the inflation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, let him rise from ash, or myrtle water, and sumacs, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses shall rise from old wine, or of their own water, or of a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; 
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and one should not draw blood with leech before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and one should not sleep after blood-letting, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he is about to be bloodied and when he has been bled.  
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard those who are being bled if they are choleric, and if their blood is too much and inflamed; 
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the waist, and similar things; 
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and minced kidneys, and roast pork, and moist meats.  
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and wine smelling medium, which is between old and new, and mince parsley, and minces onions and small eggs and sparrows.  
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day that he will be treated, he must drink more than eat; 
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give no man at any time thyme or nutmeg before the cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs; 
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle the herbs, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are put without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the back and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their skin, and it is done only in order to draw blood from limb to limb, as we put them on the nipples when the child is born; 
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the cheek to lessen the member; 
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and to remove pain when there is an inflammation or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or moves the stone from its place; 
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus it acts when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; 
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable to it have been boiled; 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is here:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it must be two inches wide and half a palm in length, and have a small hole on the side about the middle, like for inserting a needle, and be of metal, so that it does not chill the patient when placed upon the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a handle and they are great and small according to the illnesses and the strength of those who take them 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and of thin ones than fat ones.  
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus one must put this suction cup on the limb: 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	grasping the handle of wax or linen, and place it in the suction cup across from the rod which is in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient; 
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and those two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one wants, there goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup 
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and grasp the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in illness of pleuresin, to every acute pain, has no stem nor point, and is not administered unless it is full of water, and is put upon the member only so much 
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not administered unless in members where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar to them; 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in their naked flesh, such as two or nails, and other similar; 
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the qualities of the user are that when you find suction cups that are in clear sweet waters without impurities, then take them; 
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them one nut in fresh water, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then let it be cured of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on leeches. 
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and fall off, if it is possible to put a cupping glass there, put one, because this is very good after. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place with ease, and then water, well, and then rub it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the wounds are too painful after the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling subsides. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the swellings are multiplied, put on top ground vitriol or alum, and similar things, until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry up on the place, it will now stop. 
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more of this, take other ointments. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the ointments will not be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until it bleeds, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they ignite.  
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are burning, put powder on a bit of aloe and silphium ground up, or ashes, and now they will subside. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear son, that the fools who are looking to this chapter, will never have seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them. 
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, science is estranged in our land, because I never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have shown you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I did in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; 
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the heat is not very good, or too cold;  
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold mutton and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb;  
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his former regimen that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a thick nourishment, or there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment they recover strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones broken in the elderly and decrepit people cannot be well set or healed according to their nature because of dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too soft, such as the bones of small children. 
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But if there is no cure, put the broken bone back into the big tendons that are tight and join the limb together, as much as it can until it is strong as before. 
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and to all points of his work, and for this reason he should be fed with thick meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or hip, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes into a groove, and another in sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with fracture and wound, and fracture to a small crack all around.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to each manner has its own instrument and tool proper in the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place. 
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known the fracture of the bone by those that the skin is twisted, and opens well outward, and sounds upon pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or deformity at the touch, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture. 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twisting, or a split, or a small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you must not move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes in a circle and its two parts are disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that an abscess may come from it. 
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess does come there, let him leave it alone for no day until the abscess is appeased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then put it together as gently and wisely as you can, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has fragments. 
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then restrain it, as it should be hereafter.  
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it is of two parts, whether hand or foot, or to your hand if it is one small limb, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand; 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that through your work no damage or pain comes to the patient. 
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it is well aligned, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make come from their work abscesses hot and contractions to the limb, as we have wanted many times. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain at all. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain.  
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And guard that it be set straight, that no twisting may come when it is restored. 
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.  
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths; 
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as hips and thighs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and firm linen, because the broad linens enclose the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap; 
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind with light bandages, III or IV turns according to the limb, and hold your hand a little on all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, that the fracture then move away a little from the fracture; 
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the linen a little at a time, as long as you feel most of the healthy part, then take the other bandage, and turn it back over the broken part; 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the bandages padding of linen or cloths, as long as it is all equal, then tie everything above with the bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on it a soothing thing for the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and let him thus for some days.  
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then restrain above the edges, and let them be half a cane's breadth carefully drawn, or of wood from which one makes clips, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:   
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the edge that one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others; 
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And let it also be as long as it is necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness;  
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then restrain on the edges also as you did in the first hour, then tie above a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; 
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	More strict is above, less below;   
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen. 
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, as I want works of fools who make their stitches with coarse linen cords, and it is a great error, because the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that between each star there is less than two points of space. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore at the sites of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy parts, put under them poultices of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not become blistered.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not behoove to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because when the member is large, it is not necessary to put stitches further than after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your surety of abscess heat appearing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: 
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour that is held to the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundance of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and also to women and to small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and the twist: 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take bayberry and lead, and mule, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, an ounce ten. 
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, an ounce five.  
alechil VIIII З.;	and alechil nine ounces. 
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it powder, and mix them with yolk of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is hot, he should use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones completely, and is worth to many men.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another manner of plaster that is good for twist: 
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugwort and wormwood, an ounce ten.  
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloes, an ounce nine. 
acaice VI З.;	and acai six ounces. 
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Bolic armenic X Z., and grind well, and confit with water or yolk of an egg, and administer it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another manner to plaster joints and bones dislocated from their places, and appease the pain arising, and the usage of bone, and the fracture: 
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, and moisten it in oil and heat, and put it upon the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another manner to plaster which restores broken bones: 
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earth walnut leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of emplastering for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of quince, of each one part; 
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And grind, and confit with wine, and if the limb is withered, confit it with coriander water, or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of setting a bone more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of mallow, and seeds of flax, borage, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part. 
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind it, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ipocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb for restoration other than a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen one must put on the broken member, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another manner of ointment that is good for the lesion and pain:  
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mugwort and heads of doves cut off, or feathers of bird, and mallow, and wool equally, and grind them, and make an ointment from it and bind it.  
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then unbind it a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, or if his bones have not moved from their place;  
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not unbind it not for many days. 
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest or swelling, then hasten, and untie it, and remove the plaster now.  
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, and sponge of moist sea, and dip it in water, and lift the place up, as long as the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased.  
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of the hot abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And soothe the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is removed, then begin the delicate bandage again, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until he is healed.  
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and the pain and swelling are all gone, and you need emplastrum and binding, then begin it again, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not unbind it except after III days or IV or V or VII. 
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and no time leave it for XX days, according to what we see, until the fracture is joined, and approaches the setting of the bone.  
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Therefore, restrain it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I said earlier.  
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that there cannot come any nourishment; 
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Therefore, use hot water, every time you untie it, and every third day, and moisten the place a little.  
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work then nourish the limb, and heal quickly those who do foolish things, that they return the limb twisted; 
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see nothing else than to let it be and work it straight.  
des diverses manieres de brisure	of diverse ways of breaking (bones)
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined; 
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone up to the surface which is below the bone, as if made high or low; 
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this kind of fracture is called “haichure.” 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called “absolue”; 
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.  
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an enmeshed percussion, or a split or of the bone's neck, or of the head on a bone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a fracture penetrating, which approaches up to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound which is put back into the bone as subtly as a hair, and is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called “capillaire”; 
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound which is made either by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of bone enter inside, and is the  piece like how smiths do when they hit on cauldrons; 
si entre li piere dedens.	if it goes between the pieces inside. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have or whose head is moist bone, like that of a child.  
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged as if stars; 
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of them in their place.  
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by retracting upon them, and by probing with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The seeming capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs upon it, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes becoming inflamed and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, so commence the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part like this: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you press the head of the patient down firmly, and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can, and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess put a bandage on it, if it is needed, and that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; 
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is healed, and be assured of bleeding cessation;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begins to remove the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:  
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One way is that you cut at the narrow edge in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and some pointed, and some blunt; 
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in work lightly, so that you do not break the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and stiff, then it behooves you to pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with chisels, no more deeply than that it does not go through the test of bone, and it must have above the point a margin or circle that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;  
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And it behooves you to have several, so that each comes in its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all tests;  
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the III manners of bandages: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities to perceive around the broken bone is that you place a bandage on the bone, and turn to your two until you know that the bone is pierced. 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then place the bandage elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do these more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and keep that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, it is fitting that you reset the apparatus which is detached from the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it is fitting that it be more tenacious and more subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it remains any of the small bones, or no scales, so carefully to the bone with instruments.  
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then cure the wound with tents and dressings as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other manner of work is that which Galien says, which is drier. 
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the load much strong, and that is his word.  
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, then place under the head of this lentil-shaped incisional instrument, for this is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not trench from one side, and is the party acute in II coasts, so that the trenching is towards the bone; 
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you tap lightly the bone all around, and give yourself well guard of the cloth that is underneath;  
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is adhered to the bone, then gently remove it, because it is well removed without annoyance, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to first apply this asperity, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you begin with coarse rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fracture, you must bring cause according to its arrangement;  
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and that is thing which is not replied to him who has put his study in this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. 
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth;  
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then administer above it another linen cloth, and do not bind it too tightly except to keep the wound closed; 
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of licorice, and chickpea flour, and frankincense powder, and arnica, and similar things. 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer other medicinal ointments without biting.  
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound be quite clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor let it join together with flesh, because when flesh joins on the brain's membrane, it inflames and hurts, and brings great evil to the patient; 
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	because when one puts upon it a biting thing, it is burned from above.  
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take ward then, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blacking does not come forth except for the medicine that has been put upon it, and if it has virtue, then it behooves you to take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drape, and place it upon the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with the ways of treatment that are proper until it is healed.  
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that at times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it heals.  
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or the other into it, and place that fracture inside your index finger, and on the palm outward, until the bone returns according to its natural shape.  
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and guard so that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you should put it even on top of a rail a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, do this again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can. 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then put on the head of the finger bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.   
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you break the other side if there is a fracture there; 
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the wounds.  
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of a mixture of egg yolk and ground pepper. 
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And at no time should one put goose feathers in their place, and if the wind blows through there, and it holds the fracture, and it causes the patient to blow among them;  
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you see fit. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the new while you work on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p. of diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess arises, apply a poultice from the outside of ground sesame seed and powdered incense, mixed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top and do not bind the wounds tightly; 
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and care for it with appropriate things like flesh, and bandage, as with plasters and ointments suitable for that; 
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if inside the bone there is no wound, then cure it with bandages, and put in some splints, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two, except for a bulge inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient. 
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger into the mouth, and gently push the fracture inwards, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it is straight.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth happens, or a rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on top of the broken jawbone a cerot, and put a double cloth over it;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a large plate well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it onto the wound as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. 
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place a plaster on top, of the powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cautery.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a light linen bandage on top, and if the plasters dry, and the patient's condition does not change, leave him as long as he is healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it heals in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward if no piece of the bone is removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If subtle of the bone instruments are suitable to these. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to that, in order to hinder flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks more often in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Where it is broken and separated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; 
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work of this is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the arm that feels the broken bone;  
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part; 
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the fracture equal to your two, so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or gap. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; 
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and are gently the force applied, and restrain the spear in your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it befits. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes back in place, then it is necessary that the patient lie prone on his arm and place below the shoulder 1 hour glass, and push the ministers' shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then apply the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it broken, it is necessary that you divide upon.  
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and treat the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any raising, then it cut with one of the incisions that you have. 
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you place under the force a this instrument, to keep the soft tissue.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and resembles a spoon, and is not quite hollowed out, and be as wide as it suits, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work. 
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two ends, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are assured of the hot abscess, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt hot abscess, if employ the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one bandage in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powder from the mill and beaten egg white, and put light dressings above, and put a sphere under the seat, if you need it. 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then put the double cloth above the dressings and the plaster.   
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender stick of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. 
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the stick on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; 
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and tighten it on each side, and when you see that the bandage holds the bruise well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reward (bind) it every day, and when the bandage loosens, then bind it again; 
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit when he sleeps, in order to raise the shoulder higher; 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	so it will lighten the bruise from the pain by aligning the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then restart the bandaging if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it like this until it is restored 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within at most XXVIII days, and in less for no man 
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens sometimes that the shoulder breaks or its socket is displaced in the middle, and it is not known if there was a fracture except by touch; 
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	so set the joint according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can; 
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on top of the wound powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light dressings, and put a double cloth above; 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on top a wide and thin pad, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the pad touches the shoulder, then place cotton dressings beneath it so that the pad lies evenly; 
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then binds it with a very strong bandage firmly so that the bone does not move from its place, and look at the joint every day. 
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it softens, binds it again, and places the bone straight if it is out of place, and lies the patient on his side. 
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is complete, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that is easily put out of place. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the joint, so do it above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the edge. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in its marrow, it sinks to the lower part, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all things, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages within the broken bone, and it smells quite bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and joins the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and carefully tries to put them straight in every way as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put on plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light wool, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on top of the broken bone so that it doesn't move 
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the band around to the back, and restrain it firmly, and reward each hour the linen, and if it softens, restrain it; 
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape away the plaster, and address what has come up there with methods of healing; 
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put back on the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.  
de la brisure des costes	of the breakage of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for that reason that they are glassy; 
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one feels it well at the inquiry so does.  
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the fracture equal, as it is right.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the splint on it, and restrain it with a stick, if you need it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inwards, one feels the patient great pain, and prickling, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone points the skin. 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and besides pains, and coughs and vomits great planty of blood, and this is of grave sickness, and the ancients put great engine upon it. 
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to expel the wind outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for hot abscesses, if they have not yet come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then treat it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said of these [ventouses], one puts on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable.  
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction does not draw the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say any one of you should cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the lying wound, then be cured of the plague of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that pokes the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to ward off the lung.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, and drain slightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes, then put on a soft cloth in rose oil, and put it on the place. 
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure while the place of those that it is fitting to abscess, and be lying soundly on the ribs where it should, until it is healed.  
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; 
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.  
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are pulled and held still, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one puts care to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take ward if the limbs are softened, and if the accident is that which is in hands, and on the back there is looseness and discharge without will; 
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has it settled on its belly, then there is discharge without will.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is set on its back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal: 
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his care.  
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you should warm it if there is an abscess, and put on its spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased. 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on top one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.  
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dislocated, then you should cover it with the heat; 
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and set the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and then treat it with ointment that promotes flesh growth, until it is healed.  
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone of the arm is broken, which is called the 'bone of the elbow', then you put your pouch on your left hand and set it level with the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; 
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then restrain it, and if there are displaced bones, do likewise to them, and set the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there should be a little lessening at the top.  
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And make it long and sloping to the side, and come to the patient pain at the place, and tingling, and swelling of what breaks. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know what is the fracture and its shape. 
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is at the top only, set it straight, as long as it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, so make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of bark, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move.  
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place the piece under the ribs, until the bone is level.  
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed, and put upon it what we have said before. 
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there are no bad accidents.   
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the manner.  
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder is that which is between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of two ways. 
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a piece of medium thick wood, according to this form:   
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two pieces with two bands, and bend them upward, and set the patient on a stool.  
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then the bone of his arm is broken above the armpit, until it comes to the shoulder, and has in the middle a curvature of stick, then leans on no heavy thing or the minister stretches it down. 
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the splints the fracture even to his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.  
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture in their hands, and the other holds below at all .i. point, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, restrain the limb below the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it behooves you to put one linen halfway under the armpit, and the other towards the side, below the fracture.  
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And also if the fracture is towards the side, then it behooves to put the linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture be even on the place, and on the side; 
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then put the fracture even, as it should, and restrain it, if abscess comes there.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess comes there, do not restrain it until the 7th day, and put on a half-linen cloth in  oil of roses, until the abscess is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the bandage on the break, then assemble the arm onto the auxiliary, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; 
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage, and restrain on the auxiliary, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use splints, and put on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint 1 finger's width of space, and be each splint so large that it passes the break 3 fingers on each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then restrain above the bones, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on the bruise, more strongly and less in distancing 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, so leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; 
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then look every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the nourishment cannot come to the limb for because it is too tightly bound 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents come, so do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder one cushion of plain wool equally, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bonds are softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if he addresses it by the virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat that we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat is first finely minced; 
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse.  
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in 40 days from all; 
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must unbind it and administer baths and medications for the place to be treated.  
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and obstructed, it remains for 1 day or 2 months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "fossil," because one is small and it follows the socket;  
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large and it is the one that is below, towards the small one; 
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes the large fossil breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.  
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the bone is broken, its healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's the big bone, then it should be pulled harder.  
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it over the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other hands, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; 
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or on the rope, and one other minister to the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the care. 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of restoration abscesses appear, then glue the veil of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and lay him covered gently on top, until the abscess is calmed. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cautery, and put on the plaster of ground powder with abundance of egg white, then put on the stitches, and let the stitch of the scalpel be more outward, and a little wider than the others. 
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six stitches or arms in more positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the cut is in one of the bones, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and pull it more upwards above the cut than elsewhere, and all days less in moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. 
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages that are on the cut be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, with which it is stitched, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the member with hot water, until the itching is appeased; 
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and leave the limb not too tight resting.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the bandage.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the numbness passes, and then restrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if it's a wound, then he places his hands on his neck, and keeps his necks equal, and guards against movement and agitation, and sleeps on his back; 
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this sprain is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on us there are few fractures, and it comes but rather often a sprain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed, and be straight in front of him equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the board outstretched, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal in sight, until they are well joined; 
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; 
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be enveloped in a linen sheet.  
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the bottom of the foot, near the plant of the foot, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken plant.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then tighten it with a long cloth, and let the splint of hard wood be as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as is necessary.  
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of the two bones, if it is the bone, set it straight, as necessary.  
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and tighten it with the plant, and if you see that it is put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move. 
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is as the other two, such as in the index or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that is after. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you tie them all in a line, as much as it is worth, or put on a splint, such as our pouch. 
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and in the arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to it, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the hip are many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration is done by tying one linen above the fracture, and the other below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his tie to his side evenly;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the fracture is in the bone. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, so one of the ligaments towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be below the knee, and let the extension be downwards.  
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then put the two hands on the bone equal, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put the splint and the bandage, if pus does not come. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm then return to your work and your cure;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you envelop the wound with two or three layers of hard bandage doubled, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread upwards; 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn over the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the broken bone splints, and place a splint on the leg bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloth to make even tightening, then begin to bind in three or four turns around the fracture.  
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher above the fracture, and less restrict it; 
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then tighten the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and hip, and bind three splints that are above, then return to below at the head of the thread, as far as you come near the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and restrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any other sign.  
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it occurs, untie it, and dress those that come, as we have said many times. 
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that pierce, it is necessary to remove them, if one can.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and drain pus.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And at no time is the hip broken in this way when one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	however, in this restoration made, the patient does not feel any pain.   
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the fracture is healed in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the rue of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the area of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer than a fissure, or opening, and it happens to all wounds, and without wounds, and this everyone feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is so when one puts it equal to those that are rounded to its sides, as long as it can be moved together.  
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then put the splint on, and put a round piece of wood on top if you need it, and restrain it as appropriate, then follow all the precautions we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things; 
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply to each injury what is fitting for it, until he is healed.  
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "femur," and the other "tibia"; 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and all fractures come about like those in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is all here. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in every direction. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well;  
et torne desoz.	and turns downwards. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then administer an extension, and place it even, and tie the straps evenly; 
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less severe and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the splint according to its virtue. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of thick fur that encircle the leg on both sides, and be long from the knee down; 
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them around the legs with two bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this junction the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and none administer  bars along the length of the leg, and if it is of fur, and it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly made are these in the fracture where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident. 
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it cures as long as it is sound.  
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come at any time fracture and to two places, and there is not there been other than that which causes in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there happens as bone of the foot broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, put the patient on his foot on the earth, as if he wanted to walk, and then put now your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so much that they return into their places; 
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at II shoulder high, then restrain it to the foot according, then that you have wrapped cloths around, and other things which you need.   
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four will have passed, undo the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the wrists broken, restore them, as we have said to the wrists of the hand; 
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put on the broken arm a splint according to the length of the arm, and be one point more wide, then put under the foot that table that I said, and strain evenly. 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, if put on each arm a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the table under the foot; 
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and be standing on the top of the table farther from the belly of the foot so that it holds well.  
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said to other fractures, as we have said;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and care for each accident as it is necessary. 
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of nature in a woman is broken, make her sit with her thighs spread apart, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her from behind.  
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the cavity of the woman’s body with cotton, and put as much in as the space allows; 
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then turn the woman, and lift her back up and down, so that the cotton is pushed until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and returns the bone with the stomach. 
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, put it back in, and do this for seven days or until.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	then the fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a sheep’s bladder, and tie a chain to the opening, and put the whole bladder into the vagina. 
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the groin region, until the bladder is swollen inside. 
la nature si revenra li brisure;	Nature will return the fracture itself; 
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.  
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; 
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures close to this are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it, and read my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies in more postures the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Therefore, understand this. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it into the shaft;  
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it in bandages, and leave it for three days or until it is fully healed, and it will heal completely. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It behooves him who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then let the restraint of vitriol remain, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that same day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it in place gently with your hands, by small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not prepared for you to put it equal with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; 
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this it is necessary that the one using it grasp three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; 
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and a little thick, that it does not bend at the compression upon the member in your work, and be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved part be placed upon the head of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the but at once, so long as it revives, and be equal one against another. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, until the instruments have purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either a chisel or saw, to your power. 
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then remove that which remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.  
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then soak the bandage in dark red wine and properly that's where it lies.  
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put on the wound anything else or oil except what is fitting for the healing, so that it may not bring about decay and corruption.  
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the amount of the wound, and take good care that the wound be not strained with the fracture.   
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this has been done foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time.  
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the strapping be softer and more slack than other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put on splints. 
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around it, in place of splints, hard cloths, and tie them.  
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the wound is bowing, remove what you have put on top and put healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetra-formation and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is united and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bone goes down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the next day, and it cannot unite anymore but returns back bone, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these loose pieces which bring that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large members, do not touch it, because many times death results, but let it be until it can heal. 
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall out by itself, then you can care for the wound if you are able.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you are unable, leave it alone. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the boils that come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; 
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot make the limb its natural works.  
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care therefore if it belongs to us: 
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If he administers astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaice, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with abun of egg or with aisil; 
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the wound in bandages, and restrain it well, and do not untie it for days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then untie it, and recommence another one, as long as the swelling is removed; 
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you restrain on a piece of plank well made; 
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the properties of the plank are that it takes away all the swellings from the limbs;  
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot has already become hardened like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the skin above, and make the superfluity appear;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you put it back on no razor, until it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: 
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	for one reason is because it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it should;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or for the reason that there were too many ties, and cannot come the nourishment to the limb; 
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for multitude of arsement; 
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too great movements, not at its hour;  
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths to him, and give him joy and leisure;  
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice attracts to it great nourishment, and the swelling often of water is reduced, until the nourishment comes to the limb; 
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural figure.  
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: 
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If you do not believe the fools who say that one must break a limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land; 
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these works are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and by chance death;  
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, then it is fitting that they be bathed in hot water, or softening herbs be boiled, such as leaves of willowherb, and roots, and marshmallow, and similar things;  
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the boil with a softening plaster, such as diacylum well made, and take the mucilage of willowherb, and confit it with lard or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top.   
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take fat figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.  
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And make the member move each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the crookedness is ingrained and hardened, as with stone, then it is necessary to remove it with iron, so it should be cut up to the bone, with a sharp and light scalpel. 
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put care and study into the treatment.  
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is an exit from any joint from its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it should now be brought back without splinting.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and by chance if it is set back in place with pain; 
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for because of this it is not fitting to move it while it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brings forth spasms and other pains; 
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nevertheless, when this happens,  if it is healed the patient, then leave him, until the abscesses are all appeased; 
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then set it gently, and cure each member as the wound comes in its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners. 
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are a little bit displaced from their places, and softened a little; 
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the chin, and cut the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with the word. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by the many more dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then you must reset it gently, and do not delay at all;  
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the sick person, and puts his middle finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;  
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of both hands be outside, to put it equal; 
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the finger puts it straight, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if bringing them back is painful, even if they are the two jaws together, then apply hot water and oil, until they soften gently; 
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay bringing them back, as we have said.  
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with soft material, it is placed on damp cloths in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then it is lightly tied with soft bandages; 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or to the left, nor does he strive to chew, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are numb. 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he eats what he wants lightly, and does not strive to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well numbed and healed. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be set back in an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then come fevers and accustomed swellings, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a healing;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times die those who have it, in nine days. 
de la forcelle	Of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the rib and from the hip, and it is dislocated no time at the outside, and well one feels it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and extends his arms; 
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; 
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the splint and bandage, and restrict it; 
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint which is towards the outside cannot dislocate;  
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; 
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the splint and bandage, and restrict it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same way bring back the joint of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates to the side of the axilla towards the groin; 
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is to the part of the hip; 
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance dislocated to the upper part, and this happens rarely;  
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; 
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times dislocated downwards towards the seat, even to those who have little flesh, because in these it is easier to be displaced ; 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have enough flesh, it is with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.  
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore it behooves you to prove it, as long as you are certain of it; 
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the cure.   
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known the dislocation when it is down towards the seat, and put a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; 
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the seat to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one; 
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his side, nor move in any way; 
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is ill; 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the way is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their hands under the seat, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it downwards;  
si venra hastanment.	then they come (or it comes) gradually. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water. 
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and administer a soothing and softening ointment such as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered. 
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then have the patient lie on their back, and place under the seat a piece of wool even, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull on the hand of the sick person. 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down;  
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder now returns all by itself, and if you see this happening follow this way. 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you have a strong man present who is stronger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be right towards the rib, and push the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and raise the armpit up, so that the patient hangs on the arm. 
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and some other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly.  
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can lift anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And reset it also in another way: 
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and then one puts a long stick in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also as straight as a post, and it be neither too big nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is put under the patient, but that it have drapes above, and the patient be standing on the length of the stick; 
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then its hand is stretched down on the other side, forming, and the joint returns to its place quickly; 
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a splint of the arm's length and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter from below the armpit, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie above the head of the staff drapes down so that the staff does not prick the patient, then place it below the armpit of the patient; 
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arm on top of the staff's length, and tie the humerus to the staff, and the arm at the hand's head, then place the arm on the edge of a board broad enough, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side:  
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint is now reset. 
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behoves you to put under the saddle a sphere of wool even, then put the emplasters prepared powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the saddle evenly, and turn the linen on the emplasters, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he keep quiet as much as the limb is strengthened because it will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then be quiet more after five or seven days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is hardened and not softened, then it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then you must administer cautery to III places, as it is shown in front of or chapter of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint is never fixed in its place.  
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is toward the buttock, and the breast, or behind, is done by impulse, and stretching of the hands, and it administers in another place. 
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with blows, and returns with blows.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because one sees it well and feels it well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each form. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it thus as abscesses come, because if abscesses came, then it would be grievous to reset it. 
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by adventure cannot be brought back entirely at all, even when it is in the rear;  
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by adventure death comes. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms be spread, and the hands of him according to the blade around, above and below, and puts the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fire of the root of the palm the blade which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;  
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and hold it by the ministers so that it does not move in extension; 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on each side, then that you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; 
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mire has joined the joint to his hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, as long as it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, put upon plaster dry with auburn of one egg, and strain together, and put the arm at the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then untie.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let him;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not well strung, then recommence the plaster and the bandage, and let him so for some days, as long as it is firmly put.
puis le deslie.	Then untie. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub him well, and press until he is soothed. 
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put on the joint a fleece of fat wool, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him enter into the bath. 
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the fleece on top, and then enter into the bath. 
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see fit, put on a warm bundle of moist fleece with butter, and fasten it up. 
si revenra a sa disposition.	then it will return to its place.   
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, more than the other joints. 
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb becomes swollen or that an abscess comes hot. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the bringing back is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns. 
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in its place;  
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table at extension and return. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts the back of their hand on the table, and the healer places their hand above the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is well.  
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply poultices of soothing plasters, and let him leave so as not to restart. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted. 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does not harm the patient further than that while his hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all.  
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Therefore, know that the nerve is severed, or the artery. 
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other remedy except to constrict with a cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At no time are the bones of the hand dislocated on each side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly; 
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore, they are the bones, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the bone, and lean it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then put it even on that day. 
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and of the knot we have said, and untie it each day, and let it move, and tie the knot again. 
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often, until it is tight, and just as well if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed. 
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And just as well if it is dislocated from elsewhere.  
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the joints jump out without volition, and cannot be held in place, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.  
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times it moves the joint at four parts. 
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	The one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure of this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood. 
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure nor healing of all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, said the old ways of cure with great words, in which there is not much profit at all.  
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly in the two sides, and one cannot cure except for that properly which comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in a level place, and have a strain below him so that he does not bleed.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put the tinder in the head into the earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen below the hips of the patient, and the other at the waist, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and the minister knows the links, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones. 
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well closed, the bones as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns.  
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of III arms long, and place it under the loin, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the loin, then put the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the mire his feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; 
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, then do it with the turning crank that turns by hand.  
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And is that you put two bones at the head of the sick person of one arm of great length, and towards the feet two others, and between each bone, above and below, a palm's width of length; 
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each twig a hole pierced, or the turn (of the fire) is corrected, and be the twigs firmly in earth, so that they do not move. 
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two twigs have one turning twig, so that the line turns, and have in each turning two small twigs of an arm's length, to turn the fire. 
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the line which is among the ashes to the fire towards the head, and the other line towards the feet to the other fire, and each of the ministers turns his fire all along the line, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is straightened, place on top a drying plaster with abundance of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers' length, that covers the location of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind it with a line as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed; 
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if any thing comes at the end of health, it is fitting to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the method that we have said before; 
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes it comes to the appearance in the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; 
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone which opens, therefore one should not have presumption there:  
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for it might bring death by chance. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and do not come out like the other joints; 
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parts:   
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inward and outward, and forward and backward;  
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inward then, and less dislocated forward and backward.   
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within it is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot double his knee at the fire. 
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the limb which is beneath swollen with a hot abscess, because of that the head of the hip comes near.  
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes on the outward side, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who has it in front, is that his leg is well according to its fulfillment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.  
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and his anger is softened, and his hip is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The returning of this kind of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, there is no cure; 
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and he must have no presumption. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of these four manners of dislocation, so hasten that you return the joint, and the length inside and outside, and the movement to right and left. 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other care.  
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply the minister strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or on the ligament that lies above the knee;  
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then tightly grips with a forceful pull on the hip.   
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the ligament
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upward and downward all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.  
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not so, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance. 
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is at the hip, then it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then place the linen on the root of the thigh, and the one that is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the thigh; 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large root of the diseased thigh, and extend it outwardly formed:  
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it will return to its place now; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen strip above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two times more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then he must be hung by the head of a pole, and on the ground two arms' length. 
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command to the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers stand with the patient, who firmly embrace the hip, for the joint returns now quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the back, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and restrain the limb on the leg properly, and on the foot also. 
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two sticks, one at the head and one at the foot, then place a stick between the hips of the patient to help form it. 
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And have bundles of damp cloths around it so that it doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the minister puts his hand on the dislocation evenly.  
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not so, put him on a table,  and press him as we have said in the glossary, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said. 
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and puts the hands his pain on the angry sick, then presses with the other hand, and the end down toward the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the sick person down, nor raise up on the ground, but rather that he be as though the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips. 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on his face, and the band extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table. 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be at point when the sick person extends his legs, and they will be equal.  
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the band of a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three days or four, then undo it, and put the splint on top. 
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, hold them, as before, and let it be three days; 
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then untie it, and allow it to move freely, until the limb is fortified.  
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways: 
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;  
et ne desalue point devant.	and does not dislocate in front. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bring it to his hip, know that it is dislocated; 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;  
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee. 
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And some other ministers extend their foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he feels his leg at his hip lightly.   
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And put the plaster on top, and make him raise his leg to his hip, and let them be bound together for three or four days, then untie it. 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not let the patient work at all to go, until the limbs are strengthened.  
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer a strong stretching, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front of where it was dislocated: 
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The return should be gentle, and one must extend it gently with his hands when he is just numbed.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, then you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him down by one minister by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then treat the foot with your right hand, then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot up nicely. 
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; 
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good; 
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, begin the work again, for it will return.  
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stick a  rail firmly into the ground between their hips, and tie cloths around it so that it doesn't move the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then hold the hips with ministers, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the rail so that they tie it above the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and the rail should be placed between the hips of the patient to hold them down while being extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mire equal the dislocation with his hands, and others ministers hold the sound leg at the groin, and the dislocation will return easily. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is pointed, put the plaster and stoppings on top, and the strain forms, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bonds are not too tight. 
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds soften, tighten them again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then unbind on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days. 
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to it then you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, then it behooves you to make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table quite straight, and put your foot upon what separates the joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it comes back. 
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is aligned and there is nothing separating it, then put under the sole of the foot a board two hands wide, then restrain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then unbind it.  
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make him rest until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not modest in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold; 
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing poultices hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope in it, then set the limb now to its place, so that the abscess may come to a head there;  
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing poultices hot, and treat the wound as it is necessary, with dried dressings; 
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set them, and do what we have said in simple ailments; 
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you misfortune according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. 
