Chapter Sixty-One.
On extracting the stone in women.
Stones rarely form in women. If one of them develops a stone, its treatment is difficult and avoided for many reasons. One is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you do not find a woman who permits herself to be examined by a physician. 
If she is chaste or has close male relatives, a third reason is that you will not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially manual work; and fourth, the place of incision for stones in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a deep incision.
And in that is danger.  If necessity calls for it, then a skilled female physician should be sought, but she is rarely found. If you cannot find her, seek a kind, gentle male physician. Or have a midwife skilled in women's matters present, or a woman with some knowledge of this craft.
Have her attend and instruct her to perform all that you command her, beginning with the examination for the stone. That is, she should see if the woman is a virgin. She should insert a finger into her rectum and examine for the stone. If she finds it and can press it with her finger
then instruct her to make the incision.  If she is not a virgin but is married, instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If she finds it, she should move it from the opening of the bladder downward as far as she can until it reaches the base of the thigh.  Then make the incision opposite the middle of the vulva at the base of the thigh, on whichever side is easiest and where the stone is felt.
Her finger should not move from the stone, pressing down upon it. The incision should be small at first. Then insert the probe through this small incision. If the stone is felt, enlarge the incision as needed until you know the stone can be extracted. Know that there are many types of stones.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and branched.  Know their types so that you may be guided by this in what you intend. If bleeding is excessive, sprinkle powdered vitriol on the area and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone is extracted. And be sure to prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned for the removal of stones in men to help you in your work. If you are overcome by bleeding, and know by the pulse that it is from a severed artery, apply cautery to the area.
Bind it tightly with bandages, leave it, and do not return to it.  Leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient might die. Then treat the wound.  When the bleeding has subsided after a few days, and the area has become less inflamed, return to your work until you extract the stone.
