Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel may be slightly displaced or completely dislocated. Its dislocation can be either inward or outward. The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
As for the treatment of its slight displacement, it is easy to reduce it. It is to be extended gently with the hands and straightened until it returns. As for its treatment when it is completely dislocated, the patient should sit down and be held by a strong assistant, supported from behind his back at his waist.
Then you take his foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below his foot at the place of the Achilles tendon. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left twice, then extend it with the left and push the instep with the right towards the leg without violence.
Do this twice as described, then push the instep to the leg the third time while you pull the Achilles tendon. If it returns in one or two times in this manner and you see the foot is straight, then stop.  Otherwise, repeat the procedure, for it will return.
If its reduction is difficult for you by what we have described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and firmly fix a strong stake in the ground to be placed between his thighs, having wrapped rags around it so that it does not harm the patient. Then an assistant should hold his thigh.
Then another assistant extends the leg, either with his hands or with a strap that he ties around the ankle of the leg. Then each assistant pulls in the opposite direction of his companion, and the stake stands between the patient's thighs, holding him so that his body is not pulled downwards during the extension. Then the physician sets the dislocation with his hands.
And another assistant holds the healthy leg downwards, for the dislocation will return quickly. When the dislocation has returned and you are sure of its proper reduction, apply the dressing and the splint and tighten it with firm bandages and tie the foot downwards with the bandage. You should be wary of the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandaging is not too tight on it and harms it. Then leave it for two or three days. If the bandaging loosens, tighten it, then remove it on the third or fourth day. And the patient should refrain from walking for forty days.
If he attempts to walk before this period, you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not recur and be ruined and will not thereafter accept treatment.  If a hot swelling occurs to him, then you should use to soothe it what we have described previously in other places of treatment and poulticing until it goes away.
