Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On the Excision of a Uvular Swelling.
Which is called a grape. If a discharge descends to the uvula and it swells and is white and elongated, then it is called a column. And if it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a grape. This is if it has been treated with what we mentioned in the section on cauterization, but the treatment has not been successful.
And I saw the hot swelling had subsided from it and it was thin, so it should be cut. But anything from it that is collected and round, and does not have length, and is blood-colored or saffron-colored or black or has no feeling, should be avoided cutting.
There is danger in it for the patient.  So, if you see it with the characteristics I mentioned, of its whiteness and length, you should sit the patient beside the sun and depress his tongue with the instrument previously described. Then insert the hook into the grape.
And pull it downwards and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the tonsils. And you should not cut from it except what is in excess of the natural state, no more. Because if you cut more from it, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, use what we described for cutting tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of cutting it, then you should use a trick to cauterize it without fear or caution.  The method of cauterizing it is with a sharp medication, which is that you place the patient's head in your lap.
Then depress his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then take some of the sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and mix it with quicklime, making it neither thick nor thin.  Fill the hollow of this instrument with it, and this is its picture:
Its end, which you put the medication in, has a hollow like the hollow of an ointment spoon. Place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula itself, with the patient lying on his side so that saliva flows from his mouth, from inside his throat, lest anything from it descend into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand on the medication, while pressing it on the uvula for about half an hour, until you see that it has blackened and the sting of the medicine has subsided. And if you wish, you may take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a probe, and wet the cotton in the medicine.
And insert the probe with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the uvula. Do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula. Then leave it, for it will wither and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, reapply it.
And after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula with cotton soaked in ghee and dry the medication around it with it. Then gargle with cold water and treat it externally with poultices and internally with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than excision and further from danger.
The uvula may also be treated with something gentler than cauterization and excision; it is treated with fumigation in this way: Take lavender, hyssop, thyme, rue, wormwood, chamomile, artemisia, and similar herbs. Gather them all, or some of them, in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And boil it, with the pot sealed with lute, and in the middle of the lid there should be a hole on which the hollow instrument is fitted in this way: it is made of silver or copper.
And insert the end that has the pomegranate into the patient's mouth so that the vapor ascends to the uvula through the tube until the uvula is well fumigated. Then repeat it several times until it withers. Beware of performing this treatment at the first appearance of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling, and it should only be done when its hot swelling subsides. If you don't have this instrument, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to its end so that the patient's mouth doesn't burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
