Chapter Forty-Seven.
On Cauterizing Leprosy.
As for lepers, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to cauterize it, observe. If the leprosy is in its early stages and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, and it has not subsided or stopped, and you fear that the corruption will take over the patient's entire temperament, then cauterize him on the head with five cauterizations.
One in the customary center of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the hairline, two on the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck.  Press your hand firmly with the cautery until it slightly affects the bone.
Scales will peel off from it, which will facilitate the exhalation of thick vapors. Cauterize him also over the spleen itself as previously mentioned. However, if the leprosy has persisted in the patient and has manifested clearly, then it is necessary to cauterize these cauterizations that we mentioned on the head.
One cauterization on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the cervical vertebrae, six on the dorsal vertebrae, one large one on the coccyx at the base of the spine, another above it on the same table, and two on the hips, one on each hip.
Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the nipples of the chest, and cauterize him on each joint of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet and ulna of his hands.
And be careful of the nerve that is on the back of the heels, lest you burn them. One may also cauterize the pubic bone, another on the cardia of the stomach, and another on the liver.  Know that the more you cauterize, the more beneficial and effective it is.
And know that the sick person does not feel the pain of cauterization as the healthy person does, because his body is numb.  The cauteries should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the characteristics of the irons.
Then treat the cauterization with powdered fenugreek with honey and other treatments until he recovers, God willing.
