Chapter Eleven.
On the reduction of a fractured humerus.
The humerus is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is fractured, reduce it in one of two ways. One of these is to take a curved, smooth stick of medium thickness, like this image:.
And tie two straps to its ends, then suspend it from a high place. Have the patient sit on a chair, then place his broken arm on the stick so that his armpit is affixed to the middle of the curve of the stick. Then suspend something heavy above it.
Or a servant stretches it downwards, then the physician sets the fracture with both his hands until the fracture is returned to how it should be. The other way is for the patient to lie on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck by a strap.
Then you order two assistants, one of them to stabilize what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to stabilize below it, and each of them extends it in his direction. And if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a strap below the fracture and a strap above it, and each of the assistants extends them in their direction.
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, then the middle of the strap should be under the armpit and the other below the fracture towards the elbow. Likewise, if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary for the strap to be placed at that location and on the elbow itself.
Then you set the fracture gently, without violence, until the fracture is set as it should be and joined well. Then bind it if no hot swelling appears. But if a hot swelling appears, leave the binding until the seventh day and put on it oiled wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
So when the swelling subsides, then bind it. The method of binding is to apply the dressing to the fracture, then apply a roll of new cloth over the dressing, then bring the forearm onto the upper arm itself, and place his hand, open, on his shoulder.
And apply the cloth and the binding on the upper arm and forearm so that the forearm acts as the splints, if there is no obstacle preventing you from doing so and nothing has shifted in the broken bone. If you fear that something will shift, then use splints.
That is, you place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than all the other splints, and let there be a finger's width between each splint. And let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, extending three fingers beyond it on each side.
Then you bind the splints with the binding mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
That is, your binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture.
And the farther from the fracture, the looser the binding. If you find that applying the splints and binding, as we have said, at the time of your setting the limb from the first hour is suitable, then do so.
And if you fear hot swelling, leave the binding and splints until the seventh day, as we have said. Then inspect the bandage every three days, lest itching or swelling occur in the area, or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, and correct all of that as we have mentioned.
But if you are confident that none of this will occur, do not loosen the bandage except after many days. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a cushion filled with wool should be placed moderately under the upper arm.
And check at all times, day or night, lest the shape of the fractured limb be distorted or the bandage loosened, and correct all of that with your best effort. And make the patient's diet according to the order we presented, that the food be light at first, until the bone begins to strengthen.
Then you should increase his food. For it is usual for the upper arm and leg to strengthen in forty days. Then it should be unbound, and he should use the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.  If the fracture is severe and comminuted,
do not remove the bandage from it until fifty days or two months.
