Chapter eighty-seven.
On the amputation of limbs and sawing of bones.
Limbs may become gangrenous, either from an external cause or an internal one. If you have treated this corruption with medicinal treatment, and the treatment has not been successful, and you see the corruption spreading in the limb, nothing stopping it.
Then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved thereby from death, or from a great affliction that is greater than the loss of the limb.  And the sign of what has happened to him is that the limb blackens until you think that fire has burned it.
Or it putrefies after the blackness until that putrefaction spreads to what is next to that limb and takes over the whole body, so hasten to amputate it. Likewise, if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion, or a viper, or a tarantula, and the like.
If the corruption or the sting is at the tip of the finger, then amputate the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread to the hand.  And likewise, if it has taken hold in the hand, then amputate it from the base of the forearm, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it takes hold in the two bones of the arm.
And likewise, if it has taken hold in the arm, then amputate the arm at the elbow in the joint itself. But if the corruption has spread and you see it has reached towards the shoulder, then do not amputate the shoulder at all, for in that is the death of the patient.  And use other treatment to the extent possible.
And likewise, you do with the foot: if the corruption has taken hold in the toe, then amputate the toe at one of the phalanges. And if it has taken hold in the metatarsus of the foot, then amputate the entire foot. If it has ascended to the knee, then amputate the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, then there is no recourse but to leave it and surrender the patient to death. The method of amputating the limb or excising it is to tie a ligature below the place you want to amputate and tie another ligature above the place.
And an assistant stretches the one ligature downwards, and another assistant stretches the upper ligature upwards, and you expose the flesh between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then it is amputated or excised. And it is necessary to place linen rags on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the healthy area, which would cause the patient additional pain and a hot swelling. If bleeding occurs during your work, cauterize the area quickly or apply some styptic powders, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bandage the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals.  I will tell you about an example: this same condition that I am describing to you occurred in a man's leg, namely, blackness appeared in his leg with a burning sensation resembling fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his toe until it took the entire leg. So the man hastened, on his own, when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb, with the intensity of the pain and burning he was experiencing, to amputate it at the joint and he recovered.
Then, after a long time had passed, this same corruption appeared in his index finger, so he came to me. I intended to repel that excess with the medicines that I applied to the hand after cleansing his body, but the excess was not repelled and began to spread to the other finger.
Until the corruption spread in the hand, he asked me to amputate his hand, but I refused him, hoping that I could repel that excess, and I also feared death for him if his hand were amputated, because the man's strength was failing. So, when he despaired of me, he returned to his town.
Then I heard about him that he hastened to amputate his entire hand and recovered. I have told this story only so that it may be of help in cases of this kind of disease and so that it may be a guide to be followed and acted upon.
