Chapter Forty.
On cauterizing and incising tumors.
Tumors have many diverse types, as will be mentioned one by one in this book.  They differ in their cauterization and incision in two ways.  One is the type of tumor itself and the humors it contains.
The second type stems from the locations they arise in the body, because a tumor occurring on the head is different from a tumor occurring on the buttock, and a tumor occurring in a fleshy place is different from a tumor occurring in a joint; the treatment for each of them differs.
Some tumors should not be cauterized until the pus in them has matured and is complete, and some should be cauterized while they are fresh and have not fully matured, such as tumors that are close to the joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and remains there for a long time until it putrefies what is around it, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a chronic illness of that limb, or the tumor may be near a principal organ.
For if you delay its cauterization until it matures, you will harm that principal organ, or it may be near the anus, so you cauterize it fresh. The reason it is necessary to cauterize the immature tumor that is near the anus is so that the abscess does not putrefy and penetrate into the anus, becoming a fistula.
And it becomes incurable. You should know the time to cauterize tumors that have fully matured, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the redness and throbbing decrease, the head of the tumor softens, and all the other signs.
The cautery should be applied at the lowest point of the tumor, if possible, so that it is easier for the discharge to flow downwards, or at the thinnest and most protruding point of the tumor.  The cautery should be applied lengthwise along the body if the tumors are on the hands or feet.
And the locations of the muscles, tendons, nerves, and arteries, and in general, in all flat areas that have no curvature. As for those that bend, the cautery should be applied according to the location. But if the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is best to leave it uncauterized.
Until its maturation is complete, as we have said. For if you cauterize it before that, the pus will flow from it for a long time, and it will be very harmful and messy, and perhaps its lips and depths will harden. Some tumors may be cauterized across the body when necessary or depending on the need of the limb.
A single cautery should be used for small tumors, and a wide cautery or many incisions for large tumors, depending on the size of the tumor. Some tumors may need to have the skin scraped and cut if it has become like a rag.
And it reaches a point where it has died, such as what happens in many boils and abscesses. Some are incised with a triangular incision, and some are cut in the shape of a myrtle leaf, like inguinal tumors.
Some use a circular incision, a crescent-shaped incision, and similar incisions. If it does not have a head, such as smooth, flat tumors, it should only be cauterized simply. If the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time, and you cauterize it, do not rush to remove all the pus at that time.
Rather, remove some of it, then dress the tumor until the next day, then remove some of the pus again. Do this repeatedly, gradually, until you remove it all.
Especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, as the vital spirit often dissolves with the sudden exit of pus, so the patient may die without you realizing it. So beware of this matter with great caution. 
After you cauterize these tumors, you should wipe the wound and examine it. If the wound of the tumor is small or the incision is single and simple, use linen or worn-out cotton wicks. If the tumor is large and the cautery incisions are numerous...
you should insert a wick into each incision so that they reach each other. If part of the skin of the tumor has been cut or scraped, you should pack it with worn-out cotton or linen lint without moisture and bandage it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding site repeatedly.
If the bleeding continues, you should use the procedures, treatments, and powders that we have described in many places in this book and in the section. If it is winter and the site of the tumor has many nerves, you should moisten the bandages with syrup and hot oil.
and place them on the site. If it is summer and the areas are fleshy, you should apply bandages soaked in water and oil or syrup and oil, all cold, until the third day, as we have said. Then you should unbind the tumor and wipe it.
Use similar treatments until it heals. This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned each tumor and how to treat it, categorized and summarized.
