Chapter Seventy-Five.
On teaching midwives how to treat living fetuses if they come out in an unnatural form.
The midwife should first know the form of a natural birth. Its signs are when you see the woman pushing downwards, desiring to smell the air, and feeling relief from her labor pains.
And the exit of the fetus is quick. Know that this birth will be in the natural form, and its exit will be headfirst, with the placenta either with it or hanging from its umbilical cord. So if you see these signs, it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it descends headfirst, the placenta descends with it and she is cleansed well of those excesses. Any birth other than this is unnatural and undesirable, because the fetus may come out feet first, or its hands may come out before its head and feet.
Or one hand or one foot may come out, or its head and hand may come out, or it may come out folded, and perhaps it is turned on its back, and similar undesirable forms.  So it is necessary for the midwife to be skillful and gentle with all these things, and to beware of slips and errors.
And I will explain each of its forms and the remedy for it, so that you may be guided by it and understand it.  If the fetus comes out headfirst, the natural way, and that is difficult for the woman and labor is hard on her, and you see that her strength has weakened, then sit her on a chair and order women to hold her steady.
And apply a poultice of cooked fenugreek and moist oils to her womb. Then the midwife inserts a small scalpel between her fingers and cuts the placenta with it, or cuts it with her fingernail, so that the moisture in it flows out. And she presses the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, it is necessary to inject the woman with fenugreek mucilage and rose oil. Then, after the injection, order her to strain and make her sneeze with pellitory, and hold her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out immediately. If the hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary to push them back gently, little by little.
If they cannot be pushed back in, place the woman on a platform and raise her legs upwards, then shake the platform on the ground, and the woman holds on so that she does not fall when shaking. If the hands do not go in and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull the rest of the fetus.
Or tie its hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for it will come out.  The exit of the fetus on its feet: If the fetus comes out feet first, it is necessary to push them upwards, then turn the fetus little by little until you straighten it. Then take one of its legs and pull it little by little.
When they have come out to the thighs, order her to strain and make her sneeze with pellitory, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we have described, then return the fetus little by little until you return it to its natural form, for it will then come out smoothly. If it is retained despite all we have described.
Take marshmallow root mucilage, fenugreek mucilage, rose oil, and dissolved gum, and beat it all together well in a mortar. Then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in lukewarm water up to the hips.
When you see that her lower part has softened, make a pessary of myrrh for her, which she can tolerate. When she has held the pessary for an hour, seat her on a birthing chair, then make her sneeze and close her mouth and nose, and gently squeeze her lower abdomen, for the fetus will come out immediately. The exit of the fetus on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this way, maneuver to insert its hands little by little. Then the woman should lie on her back and let her thighs hang down while lying on a bed and clasp her hands. Then squeeze her upper abdomen little by little.
Then remove the pillows from under her legs so that they are pointing downwards. If the fetus does not come out, take both her legs and move them vigorously, then squeeze above the hips little by little until the fetus rises up. Then the midwife inserts her hand and adjusts the fetus little by little.
And tell the woman to strain until the fetus comes out. The exit of the fetus transversely, with one of its hands hanging out. Maneuver to return its hand. If you cannot return it, have the woman stand up and make her walk. If she cannot walk, have her lie down on...
her bed and shake her legs vigorously. Then use the poultice I described from the saliva-inducing agents. If labor pains take her, seat her on a birthing chair. Then work on returning the hand and adjusting the fetus to its natural position. Make the woman sneeze and tell her to strain until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus on its back, extending its arms, with its face towards its mother's back. The midwife should grasp the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little and adjust it gently. Once adjusted, apply to the vulva what we described of the ointment and saliva-inducing agents.
Then tell her to move little by little. When she has done that, sit her on the chair and tell her to lean towards the right side. Then tell her to push and make her sneeze with the kalamus, as it will come out.  The exit of the fetus upright on its side.
If it descends to the opening of the uterus in this manner with the placenta, tear the placenta with your fingernail so that it releases the fluid. If it adheres to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the umbilical cord so that it does not suffocate and die. Then push the fetus back inside until you position it as it should be.
And tell the woman to push repeatedly, for it will come out easily. The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born and live, although that is rare. As for five, it is something outside of nature; they do not live at all.
And a single placenta surrounds them, however many there are, and they are separated by a dividing membrane between them, connected to the umbilical cord of each one of them. And they may come out just as a single fetus comes out, with a natural, easy exit, and they may come out with a problematic exit, as we have described.
If one of them has difficulty during birth and becomes one of the unnatural forms we mentioned, treat it as we have described. And let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with gentleness and patience. And let her manage each form with whatever appropriate technique she can to achieve a safe outcome.
Mention of what is conceived in the uterus of fetuses that are miscarried.  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten may be conceived in the uterus. It has been confirmed to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived.
By the decree of the Mighty, the Knowing. All of this should be in the midwife's knowledge, for perhaps she will encounter something like this someday, so she can deal with it appropriately.
