Chapter Forty-Five.
On Cauterizing Hernias.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestine and omentum descends into the testicle, and this is recent and of short duration, you should order the patient to abstain from food for the day and use laxatives to bring down the stool from his bowels.
Then he should lie down on his back in front of you and you tell him to hold his breath so that the omentum or intestine protrudes. Then you reduce it with your finger, and then mark with ink under the hernia on the pubic bone a mark resembling a half-circle, its ends towards the upper part of the body.
Then you heat a cautery, this is its image.
Until it becomes white and throws off sparks, then you reduce the intestine or omentum into his abdomen. Then an assistant places his hand on the area so that the intestine does not protrude, and you spread the patient's legs apart, placing a cushion under him, and another assistant ties his legs.
And another (assistant) on his chest holding his hands.  Then you apply the cautery on the mark itself, your hand holding the cautery steady and upright, and you hold it until it reaches the bone, or you repeat it again if it didn't reach the bone the first time.
And be very careful of the protrusion of the intestine while cauterizing, lest you burn it, thus causing the patient either death or a great affliction.  And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work will not succeed. And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and for adults according to their size.
Then you treat the cauterized area after three days with ghee until the burn scab disappears, then you treat it with various ointments until it heals. And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you make his food during his treatment something that softens his bowels so that the intestine does not protrude when defecating and excreting.  Then if he wants to get up after forty days, you use a tight bandage and keep it for another forty days, and he should reduce exertion and fullness from food and drink and loud shouting.
For if this procedure is followed thus, he will heal completely, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its chapter, God willing.  As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is incipient, if you want it not to increase, then cauterize the hernia with a circular cautery according to its size.
And let what you burn of the skin be like two-thirds of it. Then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing.  Some of the ancients have mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular cautery in this way [accompanied by an image].
After you mark the hernia with ink, making the horizontal line on the upper side of the hernia and the other line downwards, and you bring down your hand in the middle with a single nail-shaped cautery.  The first cauterization is easier and better, God willing.
