Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the Treatment of Umbilical Protrusions.
Umbilical protrusions occur from many causes: either from a rupture of the peritoneum that covers the abdomen, from which omentum or intestine protrudes, as occurs in all hernias; or from blood emitted from a vein or artery, as has been explained; or from wind that collects in it.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum and protrusion of the omentum, the color of the swelling will be similar to the color of the body, and it will be soft without pain, and its position will appear varied.
If it is due to protrusion of the intestine, its position will be, in addition to what we have described, more varied. If you press it with your fingers, it disappears and then returns, and perhaps there will be gurgling with it, and it greatly enlarges upon entering the bath and with strenuous exertion. If it is due to moisture, then it will be soft.
It does not disappear if you press it with your hand, and it does not increase or decrease. If it is due to blood, then, in addition to these signs, the swelling appears blackish. If it is due to newly grown flesh, the swelling will be hard and solid and will remain a uniform size.
If it is due to wind, its touch will be soft. The procedure in this case is to observe. If the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind, then you should refrain from treating it, for in that there is danger and risk, as I informed you in the chapter in which I discussed swellings that occur from an artery and a vein.
If the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or omentum, then you should instruct the patient to hold his breath and stand upright, stretched out. Then mark with ink around the entire umbilicus.
Then instruct him to lie down on his back in front of you. Then make an incision with a broad scalpel around the umbilicus at the place you marked with ink. Then pull the middle of the swelling upward with a large hook, then tie the site of the incision tightly with a strong thread or silk string.
The knot of the tie should be a slip knot. Then open the middle of the tightened swelling above the tie and insert your index finger into it and search for the intestine. If you find that the tie has caught it, loosen the slip knot and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find omentum, pull it out with a hook.
And cut off the excess. If an artery or vein obstructs you, cauterize it gently and return to your work. Take two needles and thread two strong strings through them. Insert the needles into the incision you made around the swelling, hardened and passed through. Then tighten the swelling in four places onto the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the tightened flesh rots and falls off on its own, or cut it off when it thins and rots. Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.  If the protrusion of the umbilicus is from flesh growing in it...
or from moisture, then it is necessary to scrape out the swelling as we said, and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it. Then treat it with what will heal the area.
