Chapter Twenty-Four
On the Treatment of Nasal Polyps.
Various excess growths may develop in the nose. Among these are some that resemble a multi-legged scorpion. Some are hard, cancerous growths, the color of dark blood. And some are soft growths, not the color of dark blood.
If any of these growths are soft, and are neither malignant nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit facing the sun. Open his nostril and insert the hook into the growth, then draw it outwards. Then cut whatever you can reach of it with a delicate, sharp scalpel, cutting from one direction.
Until you are certain that all of the growth is gone. If any of it remains that you are unable to cut, then gently scrape it with one of the delicate instruments, so that nothing of it remains. If the bleeding is overwhelming or a hot swelling develops...
...treat it as appropriate. Or if the growth is malignant, quickly cauterize it to stop the bleeding and remove all of the growth. Then, after the cutting, apply vinegar and water, or a medicinal drink, into the nose. If the nose opens and the fluid flows down the throat...
...know that it has healed. If the fluid does not pass through as it should, know that there is a growth inside, on the upper part of the ethmoid bone, which the instrument has not reached in cutting.  In this case, you should take a somewhat thick linen thread...
...and tie many knots in it, leaving the space of a finger or less between each knot. Have the patient contrive to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or whatever he can, after twisting it like a wick. Have him draw it back up through his nose until it reaches the nasopharynx.
...and out through his mouth. Boys in school often do this sort of thing; it is easy for anyone who wants to. Then, bring together the two ends of the thread, the one that came out through the mouth and the one that remains in the nose.
Then saw the flesh with the knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the growths have been cut by the knots of the thread. Then, remove the thread and, after wiping away the blood, insert into the nose a wick that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more.
...until the ointment consumes all the remaining growths.  Then, lastly, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals. If it requires a drying treatment, apply it.
This is an illustration of the syringe with which oils and medicines are instilled into the nose:
Make (it) of silver or copper, resembling a small lamp, its opening and channel being open likewise.
And if you wish, make the tube closed like a reed, and the syringe’s channel flattened.
It has a handle at its end, as you see, to be held when you heat oil in it, or whatever you wish of juices or liquid things.
