Chapter Forty-Six.
On the illustrations of the instruments.
Which are used in incisions and abdominal surgery, among them are illustrations of probes, which are of three types, including large, medium and small.
Illustration of a large probe:
Illustration of a medium probe:
Illustration of a small probe:
They are made of steel iron, with square, smooth ends to facilitate entry into tumors. These are illustrations of the probes, and they are called probes. They are also of three types: large, medium, and small. Illustration of a large probe:
Illustration of a medium probe:
Illustration of a small probe:
It is suitable for examining tumors, wounds, fistulas, and hidden areas for what is inside them, such as bones and other things. It is made round, polished, and smooth like probes, from Chinese copper or Spanish copper, or from copper, or from iron, or from silver, and the best of them are those made from Spanish copper.
Probes can also be made of black lead, and they are suitable for probing fistulas that have a curvature in their depth, so that they bend with their flexibility with that curvature.  They are also of three types, because some of them are long, some are medium, and some are short.
According to the depth of each fistula, and its thickness is made according to the width and narrowness of the fistula. Illustration of a large lead probe:
Illustration of a medium lead probe:
Illustration of a small lead probe:
Illustrations of hooks, and they are of many types, because some of them are simple, I mean those that have a single hook, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small. And some of them are blind hooks, and they are of three types. And some of them are hooks with two hooks, and they are of three types. And some of them are curved hooks with two hooks.
And they are of three types. And among them are hooks with three hooks, and they are of three types. And all of these types, each one is needed in its place. Illustration of a large simple hook:
Illustration of a medium simple hook:
Illustration of a small simple hook:
Illustration of a large blind hook:
Illustration of a medium blind hook:
Illustration of a small blind hook:
Illustration of a large double-hook:
Illustration of a medium double-hook:
Illustration of a small double-hook:
Illustration of a large triple-hook:
Illustration of a medium triple-hook:
Illustration of a small triple-hook:
These are illustrations of scalpels with which to incise and excise growths and tumors. They are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Illustration of a large scalpel:
Illustration of a medium scalpel:
Illustration of a small scalpel:
Their blades, with which one incises, are sharp, and the other ends are blunt. They are made thus so that they may be used to excise growths when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be reassured and find some relief from the burning sensation that he feels when the tumor is excised.
These are illustrations of probes. They are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Illustration of a large probe:
Illustration of a medium probe:
Illustration of a small probe:
They are made of copper, similar to the antimony kohl stick, and at one end is a sort of broad, two-layered spoon. At its tip is a hidden scalpel blade, resembling a bird's tongue, which can be extended or retracted as desired, as you see.
Illustrations of scalpels that are concealed between the fingers when incising tumors, without the patient feeling them. They are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Illustration of a large scalpel:
Illustration of a medium scalpel:
Illustration of a small scalpel:
Illustrations of the cupping glasses used to staunch bleeding. They are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Illustration of the large cupping glass:
Illustration of the medium cupping glass:
Illustration of the small cupping glass:
They are made of copper or Chinese porcelain, somewhat elongated and rounded, as you see, and they should be thin. It is necessary to have these types of cupping vessels, large and small, at hand to quickly staunch blood when necessary and when no medication is available.
However, they are not used to stop bleeding in every part of the body, but rather they are used on fleshy areas such as the muscles of the leg and thigh, the muscles of the arm, the breast, the abdomen, the groin, and similar fleshy, moist organs.
Other small instruments resembling pistachio shells are also made in this manner:
With these, bleeding is stopped if it flows from the site of venesection or from a cut vein or artery.  They are also made rounded in this way:
