Chapter Eighty-Eight.
On the treatment of fistulas and how to inject them with medications.
If a swelling occurs in some fleshy organ and the swelling lasts for a long time until it gathers pus, then bursts open or is lanced, and all the pus that was in it comes out, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin over it, like a rag, has thinned and the corruption has not reached the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament, and for this reason it deserves to be called a fistula.  It is not called a deep fistula unless its duration is prolonged until the corruption affects one of these organs.
Then it is called a deep fistula or an ulcer. Its treatment is to cut all of that skin around it, especially if it has thinned and become like a rag, and you are certain that it will not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere, and the corruption has not reached that extent, and there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with an injection.  That is, you examine the fistula, and if it is large, and the pus that flows from it has a foul odor, then inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
Which is vinegar, oil, honey, and verdigris, equal parts, combined in a vessel and cooked over a fire until the medicine thickens and becomes as thick as honey. Then take what you need from it and thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the fistula, and tie its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
Then expel it by squeezing. Do this for days until the fistula cleanses and the foul odor disappears. It may also be injected with lye water if this medicine is not available, and that is that you take the ash of vine wood or the ash of oak wood and pour water over it.
Then filter it and inject it until you are certain that the fistula has been washed.  If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor lye water, then inject him with water and honey mixed with a little powdered verdigris.
Or inject it with honey and wine mixed together, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine to adhere the fistula, especially if the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.  So when you have done this several times and are certain that the corruption of the fistula is gone, then inject it with what will generate flesh in it.
Such as taking some of the date palm ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and astringent wine, or injecting it with some of the other medicines and ointments whose recipes we have established in the chapter on ointments. If the opening of the fistula is narrow, not wide enough for the injection tube,
then widen it slightly with the iron, or place in it a wick soaked in the Egyptian ointment or the squirting cucumber ointment until it widens.  Likewise, if the opening is too wide, bring its lips together with stitching, and leave an opening just large enough for the injection tube to enter, and no more.
And similarly, if its mouth from which the pus flows is elevated, then cut it at its lowest point so that the pus will drain downwards, because if pus collects in the depths of the fistula, it will prevent flesh from growing in it.
If you cannot cut the fistula downwards as you wish, then you must position the limb in a way that the pus flows easily, as best you can, and be careful that none of the pus is retained at all.
As for the healing medications that are placed on the fistula externally, and how to place them on it: you should take one of the healing ointments appropriate for what you need, and spread it on a linen cloth. The cloth should be large enough to cover the entire fistula.
Then cut with scissors, opposite the mouth of the fistula, a hole slightly larger than the mouth of the fistula.  Then spread some of the soft ointments on another cloth the size of the hole, and place it over it, positioned away from the mouth of the fistula so as to allow the easy exit of pus.  And do not remove the large cloth until afterwards.
several days.  As for the one on the mouth of the fistula, you should remove it frequently to let out the accumulated pus, and to determine whether the discharge flowing from it is copious or scant, mature or immature.
In addition to this, also examine the site of the fistula itself: does the patient feel pain there or not, and is there swelling or not?  When your treatment has continued in this way, and you see that the matter exiting the mouth of the fistula is slight,
know that the fistula has closed, or is about to close. Then undo it the next day, or on the third day. And when you undo the wound, replace the cloths with others, and renew the ointment. If, after a long time, thin pus comes out of the fistula, do not despair of its closing.
Its healing is near, because the growth of flesh in some people's wounds is slow, while in others it is the opposite.  If, after many days, immature pus emerges from the fistula, know that the fistula has not closed. If the closing of the fistula is delayed,
and the matter is prolonged, increase the desiccating medications.  Let the medications be moist in consistency, and dry in potency, such as the palm ointment, especially if an extra amount of litharge has been added. Among the most effective treatments is to take the palm ointment
and dissolve it with rose oil, sprinkle it with old, moderately consistent wine, then knead it with it and use it.  You can do the same thing if you don't have palm ointment, by using honey, cooked until it thickens, or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, grind them all together, and sprinkle them on the honey while it is on the fire.
Then spread it on a cloth and tie it over the fistula, or spread the honey, which you have cooked until thick, sprinkle the medicines on it, place the cloth over it, and tie it.
Aristolochia longa, orris root, garden cress flour, and centaury can be used in similar fashion, either individually or combined. Grind and sift them, sprinkle them on the honey as described, and use it. If the fistula persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is deep corruption.
And if it has affected the bones or other hard nerves or ligaments, treat it as a fistula as described above.
