Chapter Thirty-Nine
On the Extraction of Leeches Stuck in the Throat
If you have treated the leech as we have mentioned in the section on treatment with medications, and it is ineffective, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after depressing their tongue with the instrument that was described to you.
If you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or with carefully crafted forceps. If you cannot manage it this way, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the leech, then insert a fire-heated iron rod into the lumen of the tube.
Do this several times and the patient should abstain from water for the entire day. Then he should take a vessel filled with cold water and open his mouth into it and gargle with it and not swallow a drop.  He should move the water around from time to time with his hand.
The leech will immediately fall off when it senses the water. If it does not come out using what we have described, then fumigate the throat with urine and asafoetida with the instrument that we described for fumigating the uvula. Do this several times and it will fall off.
The method for fumigation is as follows: take a pot containing embers heated by fire, and the pot should be covered with a lid with a hole in its center. Insert the tip of the instrument into that hole, then drop in the fumigant.  The patient places their mouth at the tip of the tube and closes their mouth so that the fumes do not escape, until it is certain that the fumes have reached the throat.
The leech will immediately fall off. If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation several times. The patient should endure thirst, eat salty foods and garlic, and not drink water. It must come out with this treatment. This is an image of the instrument with which you extract the leech from the throat if you see it.
It resembles hooks as you see, except that it has this curvature which enters the throat and its ends resemble the beak of a bird.  It has the roughness of a file, so when it grasps something it does not let go.
Another instrument presses down on the tongue. It is a wide ring of iron, large enough to fit in the mouth over the tongue. It is introduced into the mouth standing on its side, keeping the mouth open without the patient's volition. They are absolutely unable to remove it until you take it away.
Description of the instrument which opens the mouth, following these exact measurements.
