Chapter Eighty-Three.
On illustrations of the instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, or tin, or cast or hammered copper.  This instrument may be made small or large depending on the user.
Those used in the treatment of young children will be small, and for those whose anuses are narrow or painful, their syringes will be very gentle. Illustration of a large syringe:
Its upper funnel, to which the bladder is attached, should be wide, in this manner, with a rim where the bladder is attached, as you see.  Its lower end, which enters the anus, should be solid, very smooth, and thin.  On one side are two holes and on the other side one hole.
The size of the hole should be the thickness of a probe or slightly thicker. The bladder in which the medications are placed is made from an animal bladder or from thin sheepskin, made in the shape of a small wineskin, its diameter being a span.
Many holes are pierced around it, the distance between each hole being the width of a finger. Then, a strong thread of two-ply yarn, of ten threads or so, is passed through these holes, and the bladder is gathered like a wineskin.
When the medication is placed in it, the top of the syringe is tightened firmly between the two stones, and then it is injected. This is an illustration of the circumference of the bladder and the holes:
The method of administering the enema is to fill the skin or bladder with the medication, warmed to a temperature the patient can tolerate. Be careful that it is not too hot or too cold. Then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs upward.
A mat or blanket is placed under him. Then the tip of the syringe is lubricated with oil, egg white, fenugreek mucilage, or something similar. Then insert it gently into the anus. Then an assistant takes the bladder with both hands and squeezes it firmly until all the contents of the syringe have emptied into the intestine.
Then the syringe is removed, and the patient raises his legs against the wall. If the medication stimulates him to defecate, let him hold it as long as he can. If he sleeps with it the whole night, it will be more effective. If it is administered for diarrhea and its expulsion is hastened, repeat the enema until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings in the anus, the syringe should be very smooth, like those used for children. This is an illustration of a smooth syringe with its skin stretched over it:
