The First Chapter.
On cauterization.
And before we mention the operation of it, it is necessary that we mention the manner of its benefits and its harms, and in what temperament it is used.
And I say that the discussion on the manner of the benefit of cauterization and its harms is a long discussion and a precise science and a hidden secret, and a group of the wise have spoken on it.
And they differed on it, and I have summarized from their words the little, fearing lengthiness.
And I say that cauterization is beneficial, in general, for every bad temperament that is with matter and without matter, except for two temperaments, and they are the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.
As for the dry temperament with matter, they differed regarding it, so some of them said that cauterization is beneficial for it, and others said the opposite of that, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease that is from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is impossible for someone to be cured of a hot, dry disease with a hot, dry remedy, and the one who says the opposite of that said that cauterization with fire could benefit from a hot, dry disease that occurs in the bodies of people.
Because when you add the human body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you make the human body cold.
And I say what he said, because experience has revealed that to me many times, except that no one should imagine that matter except one who has been trained and practiced in the field of cauterization extensively.
And has become familiar with the different temperaments of people and the states of diseases in themselves, their causes, their symptoms, and the duration of their time.
As for the other temperaments, there is no fear for you from them, especially cold, wet diseases, for all the physicians have agreed upon them and have not differed regarding the benefit of cauterization in them.
And know, my sons, that among the secrets of treatment is cauterization by fire, and its advantage over cauterization by caustic medication is because fire is a simple substance whose action does not go beyond the cauterized organ, nor does it harm another connected organ except slightly.
And cauterization with caustic medication, its action may extend to further organs, and perhaps it causes in the organ a disease whose treatment is difficult, and perhaps it kills. Fire, due to its nobility and the excellence of its essence, does not do that unless it is excessive.
And this has become clear to us through experience due to long service and care in the craft and observation of the realities of the matter.
For this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, and were it not unbefitting of this book of mine, I would have presented to you regarding fire a hidden secret and the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases, with philosophical, demonstrative words too subtle for your understanding.
And know, my sons, that they have differed on the time suitable for cauterization, and they considered the best time to be springtime.
And I say that cauterization may be suitable at all times, because the harm occurring due to the time is absorbed in the benefit that is brought about by cauterization.
Especially if the cauterization is for necessary, strong, urgent pains that cannot bear delay, for what is feared from them is that they will be followed by an affliction greater than the slight harm occurring due to the time.
And do not let enter your minds, my sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that the cauterization which heals from a certain illness will not have a recurrence ever, and you consider it blameworthy.
And the matter is not as you imagined, because cauterization is just like a medicine that changes the temperament and dries the humors which are the cause of the occurrence of pains.
Except that cauterization is superior to medicine due to the speed of its success, the strength of its effect, and the intensity of its power.
And the illness may possibly return sometime, depending on the patient's temperament, the rootedness of his illness and its strength, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excess humors within it and his negligence of himself in acquiring them from foods and other similar causes.
However, unless the illness for which cauterization is used is a mild illness and in an organ with little excess humors and moisture.
Such as cauterizing a tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return in it, and that happens in the minority of cases.
As for the common people's saying that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, it is a correct statement, but not in the way they mean, because they believe that no treatment is useful, neither with medicine nor with anything else, after cauterization has been performed, but the matter is otherwise.
The meaning of cauterization being the last resort of medicine is that when we use various types of treatment for a disease, and those medications do not work, then we lastly use cauterization and it is effective, thus from this it has come about that cauterization is the last resort of medicine.
Not in the sense that the common people and many ignorant physicians mean.
The ancients have mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they said that because of the moderateness of gold and the nobility of its substance, and they said that the site of cauterization does not suppurate, but this is not absolute.
Because I have tested that and found it to do so only in some bodies and not others, and cauterization with it is better and finer than with iron, as they said, except that if you heat the cautery iron of gold in the fire, it will not be clear to you when it is heated to the degree that you want because of the redness of the gold.
And because it cools quickly, and if you increase the heat, it melts in the fire and flows, so the craftsman finds himself busy with that, therefore cauterization with iron is faster for us and closer to correctness for the procedure, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cauterization in sections that I have organized from head to foot to facilitate for the student what he wants from it, God willing.
