Chapter Sixteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If its lashes turn inward so that they prick the eye, then cauterization is of two types.
Either cauterization by fire or cauterization by caustic medication. As for cauterizing with fire, you instruct the patient before that to leave his lashes, if he is one of those who plucks them, so that they grow long and even.
If they prick him as they grow, you bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow.  When they have grown and become even, place the patient’s head in your lap, then mark the eyelid with ink in the shape of an ace of spades. 
The beginning of the mark should be close to the lashes.  Then place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in psyllium, then heat an iron cautery, the shape of which is this.
Then cauterize on the shape that you marked, little by little, in many passes, until the surface of the skin, which is in the shape of the ace of spades, is entirely burned, especially its surface. And the sign of your work being correct is that you see the eyelid has curled up and the hair has lifted away from the flesh of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it for three days. Then apply cotton with fat to it until the eschar comes off. Then treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing. If any of the hair returns after a time and the eyelid relaxes,
repeat the cauterization on that place as you did the first time. If the hair is on the lower eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural place and the hair does not prick the eye. As for cauterization with a caustic medication, you should instruct the patient to leave the lashes alone until they lengthen and become even.
Then make from paper the shape of the ace of spades. Then take some of the usual soap and some quicklime, a dirham's weight or so of each one, then grind them together thoroughly. Do this quickly, lest it dry.
Then spread some of it on the paper that you made in the shape of the ace of spades and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. Place under the eye cotton soaked in egg white, with the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger on top of the medication and press it slightly while moving it whenever the patient feels the stinging of the medication, because it will feel like a burning fire. As long as he feels the stinging, leave the medication on and move it with your finger. When the stinging stops, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
Look, and if you see that the eyelid has been lifted as it is lifted when cauterized with fire or cut, then [it is done]; otherwise, reapply the medication to the place where the medication did not take effect and did not turn black, until you have completed your work and the eye is lifted. Then place the cotton with the grease on it until the irritation from the burn subsides.
Then treat it with the palm ointment or another until it heals.  And it is necessary for you, during the procedure, to be extremely careful that nothing of the medication falls into the eye. If the eyelid loosens after a few days, and we fear something of the hair in the eye...
Then reapply the medication to that specific spot on the eyelid that has loosened, just as you did before, and then treat it until it heals. And this is the shape of the ace of spades.
And know that people's eyes differ in size, small and large, so your cauterization should be according to that. And the correct method is not hidden from someone who has practice in this craft.
