Chapter Three.
On cauterizing non-chronic migraines.
If pain occurs in a fissure in the head with a headache, and the pain extends to the eye, then have the patient vomit with medicines that purify the head, and use all other treatments that I mentioned in the sections on diseases. If that does not work, then cauterization is done in two ways.
Either cauterization with a sharp, burning medication, or with iron.
Cauterization with a burning medication is as follows: take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends on both sides. Then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a wide scalpel until there is a space under the skin that can accommodate the clove.
Insert it under the skin until it disappears, then tighten a bandage over it tightly, and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then loosen it and remove the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days, then apply a dressing.
Apply cotton dipped in fat to it until the area suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.  And if you wish, you can do this with some of the burning medications that I presented in the eighteenth chapter on burning medications.
As for cauterizing it with iron, it is done in this way: Heat the cautery iron, which is pictured here:.
It is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head is like the shape of a nail, somewhat domed and with a small protuberance in its center.
Then you place it on the painful area and hold your hand while turning the iron little by little, and the amount you burn of the skin's thickness should be about half.
And lift your hand so as not to burn the artery that is underneath, causing bleeding. Then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area and leave it for three days.
Then saturate the cotton with fat, then treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, cauterize this migraine with the knife-like tip of the cautery, taking care not to sever the artery in this migraine, especially if it is not chronic.
