Chapter Nineteen.
On the Reduction of Bone Fractures When Accompanied by a Wound.
It is advisable for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or humerus or similar, that you immediately perform phlebotomy (blood letting) if the conditions for phlebotomy are favorable, as we have explained previously.
If the wound is bleeding, you should immediately stop it by applying powdered vitriol if nothing else is available, then proceed to reduce the fracture on that same day and do not delay.
If a hot swelling does not occur.  If a hot swelling does occur, then leave its reduction until the ninth day, until the hot swelling subsides, and do not touch it on the third and fourth days at all, as it is subject to adverse symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding, exposed through the skin, you should try to reduce and straighten it with your hands gently and with slight extension.  If you are unable to reduce and straighten it with your hands, then reduce it with this instrument, which is an instrument made of iron, its length about seven or eight fingers.
And its width according to the size of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should make three or four of them, according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be rounded with some thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during the operation.
And let them be sharp-edged, with a curve at their end, and let the upper part be thick, and from its middle downwards very thin.  And this is its form:
And it is called in Greek *perion*, meaning small lever. You should place its sharp, curved end on the protruding end of the bone, and push it at once so that when the bone returns and is somewhat straight, then complete the setting of the fracture ends on each other.
If its broken end is thin and the instrument does not grip it well, then you should cut the end of that bone until the instrument can grip it. If you are absolutely unable to reduce the bone as we have described, then cut it with a similar one of the bone saws that we have mentioned.
Or saw it with one of the saws however you can. Then smooth out what remains on the bone of roughness and thin fragments. If you reduce the bone and the patient finds after its reduction a severe, troublesome pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to return it to its natural place, then do so, for you will benefit the patient greatly. When you have completed your setting of the bone, soak a rag in black astringent wine, especially if it is in summer. Do not place on the wound cerate or anything containing fat.
so that putrefaction and corruption do not occur in it. Then apply the splints when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered by cutting a hole the size of the wound in the bandages with scissors.
Be very careful not to tighten the wound together with the fracture, for ignorant doctors often do that, and they cause their patients either death or gangrene or a foul ulcer. Let your tightening be gentle and loose, different from the tightening of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or if it is a large wound and you fear some of the bad symptoms that we have described, and he feels a disturbing pain in the area, then you should not put splints on it, but make bandages of firm rags in the place of the splints and bind it with them.
If, after a day or two, you see that pus has begun to form in the wound, then remove the cloth that you placed on it with the wine, and then use the lint and ointments that we usually use to treat wounds, such as the tetrapharmacon and the like. And you should loosen the bandage.
And check the wound every day, evening and morning, until it heals and recovers. And you should position the limb so that the pus drains downwards easily. If the wound persists for many days and does not heal and the pus does not stop, then know that there are small bone fragments.
You should probe the wound, and whatever fragments are loose, extract and remove them; and those that are not loose, and are pricking the limb and causing pain, be diligent in cutting and extracting them in any way you can.
If the wound develops a cold, or erosion, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each symptom with its corresponding treatment, as previously described in its chapter.
And it is important to heed my words and bear in mind that if a large bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as the femur, humerus, or similar large limbs, do not attempt to pull it or remove it.
Death often results from this, rather leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you see a need for treatment; otherwise, leave it.
