Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Elbow.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forwards or backwards, and its dislocation is not hidden from you, because it occurs under the sight and under the touch, in whatever form it is dislocated.
And if you compare the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it will become clear to you with clear evidence, by the hollowness of the joint, and he cannot bend his arm, nor can he touch his shoulder with it.  And you should hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot swelling occurs.
For if a hot swelling occurs, it is difficult to reduce it, and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backwards, for it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations and the most painful, and death often occurs with it.
Its treatment, if it is of the kind that can be reduced, is that an assistant extends his arm with both his hands, his arm outstretched, and the physician's hands are above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the joint with both his thumbs, or with the base of his hand, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is forward, it may be reduced by bending the hand suddenly until it strikes with the base of its palm the shoulder which it faces.  If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then use very strong, powerful extension, which is that two assistants extend the arm.
And two assistants also hold the patient so that he does not move during the extension. Then the arm is rotated in every direction after a folded cloth or wide bandage is wrapped around his hand. And when the physician treats the joint with his hands, he anoints them with oil so that it will help in sliding the joint easily.
Then he pushes the joint forcefully until it returns. After its return, it is necessary to apply a bandage which has astringency and desiccation with egg white, and it is tightened firmly, and the arm is suspended from the patient's neck and left for several days.
Then it is loosened. If the joint is stable in its place, then remove the bandage and leave it. And if you see that the joint has not become firm enough, then replace the bandage and leave it also for several days until it becomes firm, then remove it. If it develops a callosity after the return of the joint and its release,
and difficulty in movement, then he should use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and kneading until it softens. Or place the omentum of a fat ram on the joint, then bandage it and leave it on him for a day and a night. Then remove it and have him enter the bath, and when he sweats, massage the joint moderately.
Then replace the omentum a second and third time, along with entering the bath, until it softens. And if you want to put on it fresh, light cow dung with fat and bandage it on him, do so several times, for it will soften and return to its original state.
