Chapter Eighteen.
On Extracting Trachoma from the Eye.
Trachoma are red vessels that grow over the eye, preventing it from seeing and weakening it over time. So you should first look, and if the eye that has the trachoma is strong and has no other disease besides the trachoma.
then extract it, which is to have the patient place his head in your lap, then catch those vessels with one or two hooks, depending on your skill, and the hooks should be gently curved in this manner:.
or there may be two double hooks in one body, like this:.
Then gently grasp those vessels with fine scissors and wipe the blood from time to time until you see the eye and those vessels are gone from it and the blood is drained. Be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the scissors, and let your work be done at midday facing the sun.
And be very steady in your work, lest you cut anything other than those vessels, then when you are finished, instill into the eye the green or red collyrium so that it may consume with its sharpness what remains of the trachoma. If you cannot extract it all at that time, then dress the eye with something that soothes eye pain.
And leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and you are safe from the hot swelling, then repeat the procedure in this same manner until it heals. This is a picture of the smooth scissors.
And leave it [and the patient's head should be in the student's lap and another should wipe away the tears and fix the gaze on the front and back of the eye, and you] The basis of the operation is that you open the eye with fixed or triangular retractors held by a student.
sharp, and the patient's head should be in the student's lap and another should wipe the tears and fix the gaze on the front and back of the eye, and you have the choice to begin extracting from above the eye or from below it. It is best to insert two hooks in the upper side, one at the end of the fornix and the other at the beginning of it.
And hold them between your middle and index fingers, then attach hooks from below opposite them, then hold them between your little and ring fingers and lift your hand gently until you see the whole trachoma has risen.  Cut it from the smaller root, if you wish, with scissors, and if you wish, with a fine scalpel.
And insert the probe on a needle and probe the entire trachoma until it rises onto the probe, and do not cut while wiping because the tears and blood will make it difficult (liquefy) for you.
Then cut with scissors what extends beyond the fornix from above and below, so that nothing remains attached except on the cornea. If you can lift it from the cornea by peeling with the probe, that is better, and it may be possible in some people.
And if you cut it, it will irritate its place for days. Soothe its pain and protect it from hot swelling, then repeat the procedure on it.
