Chapter Eighty-Five.
On Wounds of the Abdomen, Protrusion of the Intestines, and Their Suturing.
The rupture that occurs in the abdomen may be large, or it may be small or medium.  From a large one, an intestine or several intestines may protrude, and their repositioning and suturing is more difficult and complicated.
The small rupture is also difficult in another way, requiring a more complicated repositioning.  If the intestine is not immediately returned to its place, it will swell and thicken, making its repositioning difficult. Therefore, the best rupture is the medium-sized one because the repositioning of the intestine is not as difficult as with these two types.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is of four types. Two types of sutures are general and suitable for suturing the abdomen and for suturing all other wounds of the body. The other two types are specific, common to all wounds, except that they are more specific to suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one, with explanation and clarification. I say that if the wound is small and some of the intestine has come out and its repositioning is difficult, that is for one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said, or because the intestine has become swollen due to the coldness of the air.
If this is the case, then it should be warmed by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water alone, or in which has been boiled spikenard, rue, and spikenard, and dabbing the intestine with it until the swelling subsides.
This can also be done with a drink that has astringency, which is better than water alone in reducing swelling.  When you see that the swelling has subsided, wet the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mallow has been boiled, as this will make it easier to insert.
If its return is difficult after this treatment, make a small incision in the rupture with the instrument used to incise fistulas. The first treatment, if possible, is better than the incision.  The incision is only resorted to after necessity and exhaustion of other options.  This is the image of the instrument:.
One of its curved sides is sharp, the other is blunt, and the thin end is not as thin as a scalpel, but rather slightly blunted. It is an instrument resembling a small probe, as you see. If the wound is enlarged and the intestine enters, it should be returned to its natural shape.
And its proper place, if you are able to do so, is best. But if the rupture is large and in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head, and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should put his head and chest higher than his lower body.
And likewise, if the rupture is on one of the sides of the abdomen, always make your intention and purpose to have the side where the surgery is higher than the other side.  And this is how it should be done in major surgeries and in moderate surgeries.
As for minor surgeries, place him as best you can. Then have an assistant at hand, a gentle one, hold the entire rupture with his hands and bring the edges together, then reveal a little bit at a time to the one performing the stitching.
This is the method for the single common suture: take a needle, or several needles, according to the size of the wound. Then leave a space the width of the little finger from the edge of the rupture and insert a single needle, without any thread in it, into the edges of the skin.
Along with the edges of the peritoneum that are under the skin from the inside, until you pass it through that side, having brought together the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, making four layers. Then tie a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides until the edges of the wound are tightly joined.
Then leave a space the width of a finger and insert another needle, then tie it with the thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this with the needles you need until you have completely sewn up the wound.  The needles should be of medium thickness, between thick and thin.
Because very thin needles quickly cut the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore they should be medium in thickness, between thin and thick. And the needle should not be inserted into the edge of the skin too close to the wound.
So that the flesh does not quickly tear and the wound open before it heals.  And do not sew too far apart, lest the wound be prevented from healing. Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while he sleeps, and make for him supports of linen cloth on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed. This type of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it is sufficient to sew them with one needle or two or so.
The manner of the common, or layman's, suture is to bring together the four edges, that is, the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the peritoneum, at once with a needle threaded with a twisted thread of moderate thinness and thickness. Then, when you have passed the needle through these four edges, you return the needle through the same side from which you began.
So the thread lies intertwined on top of the wound, the stitching being like the stitching of sacks that are used to tie up goods.  And you should leave the space of a small finger's width between each stitch. This stitching is known to everyone.
With this stitching I sewed a wound in a man's belly. He had been wounded with a knife, and the tear of the wound was more than a span, and about two spans of his middle intestine had come out. The tear was in the middle of the belly.
I put it back in after his intestine had remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he recovered and lived after that for many years, managing all his affairs.  The doctors had judged that he would certainly not recover.
It is remarkable that I did not treat him with an ointment, because I was in a place where there was no medicine. I would place worn-out cotton on the wound twice a day and make sure to wash it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the two types of special stitching, I mention it according to the text of Galen: that you begin stitching from the skin, inserting the needle from the outside to the inside. Once you have passed the needle through the skin and through the muscle running lengthwise along the entire abdomen...
...leave the edge of the peritoneum on the side where you inserted the needle. Then pass the needle through its other edge, from the inside to the outside, on the other edge of the peritoneum. Once you have passed it through, pass it again through this same edge of the peritoneum, from the outside to the inside.
Leave the edge of the peritoneum that is on this side and pass the needle through its other edge, from the inside to the outside. As you pass it through the peritoneum, pass it through the edge of the peritoneum that is on its side, until it passes all the way through it.
Then begin again from this same side and sew it with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side. Bring the needle out from the skin that is next to it. Then return it to that skin and sew the edge of the peritoneum that is on the other side together with this edge of the peritoneum.
Bring it out from the skin that is on its side.  Do this again and repeat it until you have sewn the entire wound according to this example. The overall description of this suture is that you sew like furriers sew furs.
Sew the peritoneum once on one side with the edge of the skin, and leave it once on the other side until you are finished. As for the second type of specific suture that Galen also mentioned, these are his words verbatim.
It is that you sew it similar to how some practitioners sew, in that they bring together each part to its naturally corresponding similar part.  So, they join the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the omentum to its other edge, and that is as I will describe to you.
You should insert the needle into the edge of the omentum closest to you from the outside and pass it inwards into it alone, leaving the two edges of the peritoneum.  Then return the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside into both edges of the peritoneum.  Then return it again.
And pass it from the inside to the outside into the other edge of the omentum which is on the opposite side. This type of suture is better than the common, easy suture, which is the suture mentioned previously. These are the words of Galen verbatim.  Some have said that suturing of the abdomen may be performed with two needles.
That is, you insert a single thread into them both, and you begin by inserting the needle from your side and passing it to the other side. Then insert the other needle from the opposite side, and pass it from your side, similar to the cobbler's stitch.
And know that if the perforation is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suturing is more difficult than in other areas of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its management in its treatment is the same as the management of other wounds, that is, if you find the wound fresh with its blood before the air changes it, and you return the intestine and suture it and secure it, then apply the desiccating, healing powders to it.
If the wound has been changed by the air, then apply to it some of the ointments that you have prepared until it suppurates and the sutures fall off and the peritoneum and omentum heal.  Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines available, then apply worn cotton to it from the time it begins to suppurate, and change it twice a day, as I have instructed you, until it heals.  You will not need any other treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple.  If you fear that the principal organs might share in the pain of the wound,
then you should dip soft wool in moderately warm oil or in rose oil and place it around the areas between the groin and the armpit.  If he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, which often happens, then inject him with a tepid, black, astringent syrup.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and has become a penetrating wound into its cavity. And know that whatever part of the intestines is thick, it is easier to heal, and whatever part of them is thin, it is more difficult to heal.
As for the intestine known as the jejunum, it does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all, due to the abundance of its vessels and their size, the thinness of its substance, and its proximity to the nature of the nerve. But if what protrudes from the wound is the omentum and you find it soft, then return it just as you return the intestine.
If some time has passed and it has become green or black, then you should tie it with a thread above the place where it has blackened, lest bleeding occur, for there are veins and arteries in the omentum. Then cut what is below that ligature.
And make the ends of the thread hanging from below the wound outside of it, so that it is easy for you to pull it and remove it when the omentum falls off and the wound suppurates.  Mentioning the wound that occurs in the intestine.  Now, if a small tear occurs in the intestine...
It is possible that it may heal in some people, because I saw a man who had been wounded in his belly by a spear thrust, and the wound was to the right of the stomach. The wound became chronic and became a fistula from which feces and gas emerged.  I began to treat him although I did not expect him to heal.
I continued to treat him gently until he healed and the area closed.  When I saw that the area had closed, I feared that some misfortune would happen to the patient inside his abdomen, but no misfortune happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of conditions.
Healthy, he ate and drank and had intercourse and went to the bathhouse and exerted himself in his work. Some experienced people have mentioned that whenever a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be stitched in this manner.
That is, large-headed ants should be taken, then the edges of the wound brought together, then one of these ants, with its mouth open, should be placed on the edges of the wound. When it grips it and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off, for it adheres and does not dissolve. Then another ant is placed near the first.
You continue to do this with a number of ants according to the size of the wound, then return it and sew the wound.  Those heads remain adhering to the intestine until the intestine heals and recovers, and no harm happens to the patient at all.  It is also possible to sew the intestine with fine thread.
which is drawn from the mesentery of the animal attached to it after it is threaded into a needle.  That is, the end of this thread from the mesentery is drawn gently, then a thin, twisted linen thread is tied to its end, then that thread is inserted into the needle.
And in it is the mesentery thread, with which the intestine is sewn, then returned to the cavity. This type of stitching with ants and mesentery is only by way of hope and expectation.
But if the perforation is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy for it, nor is there any cure at all.
