Chapter Thirty-One.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation and are not subject to what happens to other joints, such as slight displacement and depression. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways.
That is, it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward. Most often it dislocates inward, and rarely forward or backward. The sign of its inward dislocation is that if you compare the patient's healthy leg to the diseased one, it is longer.
And the knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient is unable to bend his leg at the groin, and the place next to the groin is swollen and the swelling is apparent because the head of the femur has moved there.
The signs of outward dislocation are opposite to these symptoms. The sign of forward dislocation is that he extends his leg completely, but he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so forward.
And his urine is retained, and his groin swells, and when walking, he steps on his heel. The sign of backward dislocation is that he does not extend the knee and cannot bend it before bending at the groin, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
And the groin is relaxed, and the head of the femur is apparent at the location of the hip.  As for the reduction of these types of dislocation, you should observe: if the dislocation is old, long-standing with the patient, and no attempt has been made to reduce it, and it has remained in its state, then there is absolutely no treatment for it.
So, you should not attempt to treat it.  However, if the dislocation is recent, whichever of the four directions it may be, hasten to twist the joint and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left, perhaps...
it will return and not need any other treatment.  If it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare a strong, robust assistant to extend his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied on his leg above the knee, and another assistant to extend it from above.
by putting his hands under his armpits, then tightening a soft bandage on the base of the thigh. Another, third assistant should hold the end of the bandage and extend it either from the front, from the area of the groin towards the clavicle, or from behind towards the back.
And they should all extend at once, so that the patient is raised by his body off the ground and remains suspended. This type of extension is common to the four types. If the dislocation is reduced by what we have said, then fine, otherwise each type will require the specific treatment that I will describe.
As for the specific reduction if the dislocation is inwards, the patient should lie on his healthy side, then you place a bandage at the base of the thigh between the head of the femur and the area below the groin.
Then extend the bandage upwards from the area of the groin to the upper body, towards the clavicle. Then another strong assistant takes hold with his arms and grasps the thick part of the affected thigh and extends it outwards with strong extension, and it will return to its place.
This type is easier than all other types of treatment that reduce this limb. If you find it difficult and it does not respond to entering with this type of treatment at all, then you should tie both of the patient's legs together with a strong, soft bandage on the heels and on the knees.
And it should be after each of them from its companion the length of four fingers, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by the length of two fingers.  Then the patient is suspended by the head from a beam that is in the house, and his distance from the ground should be about two cubits.
Then you order a strong young man to grasp the head of the femur, and another young man hangs onto the patient, and the other young man grasping the femur pushes strongly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.  As for its specific reduction if the jaw is dislocated outwards...
The patient should lie down on the bench as we described for the patient with a hump, and the bandage should be tightened on his affected leg in particular and on his chest. Then the two pieces of wood are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then an additional piece of wood is placed in the middle of the bench, very securely fastened.
It should be wrapped with damp rags so that it does not harm the patient, so that the wood is between his thighs, so that he is not pulled downwards during the extension.  Then each assistant extends to his side, and the physician adjusts the hip with his hands. If it responds to the reduction...
If not, then place the board on it and compress it as we mentioned for the hump, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side. And if the dislocation is forward, then the patient's leg should be extended at once while he is in this exact same position on the bench.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected groin, then presses it with the other hand, and with that, the pressure should be directed downwards towards the knee.  And if the dislocation is backwards, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards.
He should be raised above the ground, rather he should be placed on something solid, as should also be the case for one whose hip has been dislocated outwards, according to what we mentioned regarding his lying on the bench on his face, with the bandages tightened.
as we said before. And compression with the board should also be used on the area where the joint has dislocated. When the return of the hip joint is complete as it should be, and the sign of its return is not hidden from you – which is that you extend the patient's legs.
And if you see them level, and the patient flexes and extends the leg without difficulty, then know that the limb has returned as it should. Then, bring the thighs together, apply the bandage, and tie it with a turban, tying it so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient should remain still for three or four days, then loosen the bandage and dressing and compare the leg with the other.  If you see them equal in length, know that the dislocation has been stabilized.  Then allow the patient to walk.  But if you see any looseness in it,
return and bandage it and tighten it as you did the first time, and leave it for three days, then loosen it. He should walk on it slowly for several days until it strengthens, God willing.
