Chapter Sixty-Two.
On incising the varicose vein.
The varicose vein is simply a collection of moisture in the white membrane which is under the skin of the testicles surrounding the testicle and is called the scrotum. It may also be in its own special membrane which nature prepares on one side of the testicle.
So that it is thought to be another testicle, and it is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane which we mentioned.  This is rare.  This vein arises from a weakness affecting the spermatic cords, so this substance flows to them, and it may also arise from a blow to the spermatic cords.
This moisture is of many colors, either yellowish, or bloody red, or turbid black, or watery white, which is most common.  The signs by which it is known:
Where the water collects, if it is in the white membrane that we mentioned, the swelling is somewhat elongated and round, like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then the swelling is round on one side of the testicle.
For this reason, one imagines that it is another testicle. And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane, then it lies beneath the senses. As for if you want to know the color of the moisture, probe the swelling with the square probe whose image has been presented previously, and whatever comes out after the probe, judge by it what is inside.
When we proceed to treatment with iron, you should order the patient to be bled, if he can tolerate it and you see that his body is full. Then he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated and you place many cloths beneath him, then you sit on his left.
And you order an assistant to sit on his right, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum and toward the side of the abdomen. Then you take a wide scalpel and incise the skin of the scrotum lengthwise from the middle to near the pubis.
And make the incision in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the skin of the scrotum in half, until you reach the containing white membrane, then peel it back and take care not to cut it, and your peeling of it should be from the side that adheres more to the testicle. And continue the peeling as much as you can.
Then you open the water-filled membrane with a wide opening and remove all the water. Then separate the edges of the incision with hooks and pull the membrane upwards, but do not touch the containing skin of the testicle, and cut the membrane however you can cut it, either all at once or piece by piece.
Especially its thin side, because if you do not completely cut it, you cannot prevent the water from returning. If the testicle protrudes out of its skin during your work, when you have finished cutting the membrane, return it, then bring the edges of the skin of the scrotum together with stitches.
Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals. If you find the testicle has been corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are in the spermatic cord, fearing bleeding, then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and remove the testicle, then treat it as we have mentioned.
If the collected water is in both sides, know that they are two hydroceles. So incise the other side as you did the first, similarly. And if it is possible for you to perform the operation as one, do so. Then wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions wool that you have dipped in oil or rose oil, and place outside other wool that you have dipped in wine and oil and spread it over the testicles and the abdomen and place folded cloths on top, which are the compresses.
And tie it from above with the bandage which has six ends in this way:
Then take two pieces of cloth, sew them together, and stuff them with carded wool in this manner, and make the straps that are tightened with it from cotton or damp wool and gather them by tightening them at the trouser belt, and one of the straps takes from the buttocks to the back.
And the second you take towards the pubis and the two ends on the thighs from below and the two remaining ends on the groins, and you gather all the tightening at the trouser belt.  This hydrocele can also be treated with cautery instead of incision with iron.
Which is that you take a fine scalpel-shaped cautery and incise the skin of the testicle with it while it is hot as we have described until the white membrane containing the water is exposed, then take another cautery of this form:
And it resembles the Greek eye, then you dab that membrane with it while it is hot until all the moisture comes out, then you stretch the membrane with hooks and peel off the containing layer with the cautery and cut it as much as you can until you remove it all and take care that the testicle is not touched by the fire.
And know that this procedure is safer and further from bleeding and better than the procedure with incision. If you encounter during the incision or during the cautery a hot swelling or bleeding or something else, then it is necessary that you treat whatever you encounter of that with the appropriate treatment as has been previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and does not bear this procedure because of its unpleasantness, then let him use the dabbing as I will describe it, which is if it is deemed correct by you with the proofs we presented earlier.
If the hydrocele is watery, then you should sit the patient on a high chair, then dab the swelling at its bottom with a wide scalpel, and make the dabbing along the body and make the opening wide so that all the water flows out, then place cotton on the area and bandage it.
And leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the exit of the water is difficult while you are dabbing it, it is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the exit of the water. 
Then it is necessary to insert into the wound a goose feather or the instrument with which the water of lovers is extracted, the image of which has been presented, or increase the opening of the wound a little.
And know that the water may return and collect after six months or so. If it collects, dab it in the same manner and the patient should fend off its recurrence.
