Chapter Four.
On the reduction of the lower jaw if it is fractured.
If the lower jaw is fractured and its fracture is not with a wound, observe: if its fracture is only from the outside and it is not fractured in two and is depressed inwards, then recognizing it is easy.
It is appropriate that if the fracture is in the right fissure, you insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth, and likewise, if the fracture is in the left fissure, you insert the index finger of the right hand and gently lift the hump of the fracture from inside to outside.
With your other hand from outside the bone, you control its straightening. If the fracture of the jaw is broken in two, it is appropriate to apply extension from both sides in a straight line until you can straighten it. If chattering has occurred in the teeth.
Or they separate, then tie those you hope will remain with a gold or silver thread or silk. Then place the qayruti on the broken jaw, then place a folded rag on it, and place on the rag a large, well-fitted splint or a piece of shoe leather equal to the length of the jaw.
Then tie it from above according to what you can tie and what is appropriate to join it so that it does not become dislodged. And you instruct the patient to be gentle and still, and make his food soft broths. If you think that something has changed in the shape in any way, then hasten to loosen it on the third day.
Then repair what you bandage with mill dust with egg white or with semolina flour after removing the qayruti from it, and put a soft compress on the bandage. As long as that bandage adheres to it and the condition of the bone has not changed, leave it.
Do not loosen it until it heals and the fracture strengthens. Often this fracture strengthens in three weeks. If during that time a hot swelling appears, use what we have repeatedly mentioned in soothing it until that swelling disappears.
And if the fracture is with a wound, observe. If a fragment or fragments have separated from the bone, be gentle in extracting those fragments with whatever instrument is appropriate for extracting them. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with the scalpel as much as you need.
Then when you have extracted those fragments, and nothing remains of them, stitch the edges of the wound if it is wide, otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for it.
And bring the wound together until it heals.
