Chapter Ninety-Five.
On Phlebotomy.
The veins that are customarily phlebotomized in the body are thirty veins, of which sixteen are in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears known as the hissing ones, and the two arteries that are in the temples, the apparent ones, and the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes known as the onlookers.
And the vein that rises in the middle of the forehead and the vein that is at the tip of the nose and the two jugular veins that are in the neck and the two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth and the two veins that are in the lower lip, these veins being known as the Jaharik, and the two veins that are under the tongue.
And as for the veins that are phlebotomized in the arm and hand, they are five veins, one of which is the Cephalic, which is on the lateral side, and the common people call it the vein of the head, and the Basilic, which is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic, and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And the Basilic, which is located on the medial side, and is also called the Axillary, and the common people call it the vein of the abdomen, and the ligament of the arm, which is located on the ulna, which is what it adheres to, and it is the one that appears clearly above the thumb, and the Median Cubital.
And it is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, it has two branches.  And in the leg and foot are three veins, one of which is that which is below the knee joint on the lateral side, and the second is the Saphenous, and its place is at the heel on the medial side, and the Sciatic vein, and its place is at the heel on the lateral side.
And in the other leg are three veins like them. As for the two veins that are behind the ears, the benefit of their phlebotomy is for chronic catarrh, migraine, ringworm, and chronic malignant ulcers of the head.  And the manner of their phlebotomy is as I describe.
And it is that you shave the head of the sick person and rub the back of it in the area of the two veins with a rough cloth, rubbing it well, then the sick person constricts his neck with a turban until the two veins appear, and their place is behind the ears in the depressed areas of the head.  Then you feel for them with your finger, and where you sense their pulsation under your finger, there you make a mark with ink.
Then you take a scalpel, which is known as the Nashal, then you insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone.  Then you lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin, a complete cut, and the length of the cut is the extent of two closed fingers.
Or thereabouts, and you let out the amount of blood that you desire.  Then you bandage them with compresses and leave them until they heal.  And it has preceded, in the beginning of the book, their cutting and cauterization.  As for the two arteries that are in the temples, the benefit of their phlebotomy is for chronic migraine and severe headache and persistent ophthalmia and the flow of acute humors pouring into the eyes.
And the way to phlebotomize them is as I describe to you: the sick person tightens his neck with a turban until the two veins appear clearly to the senses, and their pulse becomes evident under your finger. Then you mark with ink. Then you lift the skin from above the vein upwards with your index finger.
And you insert the Nashal scalpel from below and lift the vein upwards and sever it as you did with the other two veins, and you let out blood according to your need. Then you loosen the sick person's constriction and place your finger on the vein for a while.
Then you place cotton and a compress on it and bandage it tightly from above and leave it until it heals. And their mention, cutting, and probing have preceded in the beginning of the book.  As for phlebotomy of the forehead vein, its benefit, after phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, is for chronic ailments of the face, such as ringworm, ulcers, and troublesome redness.
And the way to phlebotomize it is as I describe to you: The sick person constricts his neck with a turban until the vein appears.  Then you take the instrument that is called the "axe," and this is its picture:.
You place the projecting thorn that is at the head of the "axe" on the vein itself and strike from above with a comb or something similar to it.  You let the blood flow to the extent that you desire. Then you loosen the sick person's constriction and bandage him until he heals.
It may be opened with a broad scalpel, except that the scalpel should not be sharp-tipped like other scalpels, but rather it should be slightly broad-tipped.  And you phlebotomize it obliquely, because the bone is close, so perhaps the scalpel would break in it if it were thin.
As for the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes, their benefit is for ailments of the eye, such as scabies, redness, eyelashes, and diseases of the face.  As for the way to phlebotomize them, it is that the sick person constricts his neck with a turban. Then you phlebotomize them while you are standing at his head. And let the phlebotomy be slightly oblique lengthwise with a small, slightly broad scalpel.
For the place has no flesh in it, so if the scalpel were thin-tipped, it might break. Then you let out the blood you need and place cotton on them and bandage them for one night.  Then you loosen them. As for the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose, it is beneficial for acute fever.
and severe headache and from diseases of the face, such as the red swelling that occurs in the nose, especially if it is chronic. The way to phlebotomize it is that the sick person constricts his neck. Then you grasp his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long scalpel.
And you insert it in the middle of the tip of the nose itself, between the partition of the nose, directly, because the vein is not perceptible to the touch there. For the blood emerges immediately.  And you should push your hand with the scalpel in a little and let out the amount of blood needed.  Then bandage it for a night, for it heals quickly.
As for the external jugular veins, the benefit of their phlebotomy is for shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and melancholic diseases that occur on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, impetigo, malignant ulcers, and corroding sores. The method of their phlebotomy is that the patient constricts beneath them, on his neck, with a bandage, and the practitioner stands at the patient's head.
The patient is sitting on a chair. Then you phlebotomize the vein lengthwise, a somewhat wide phlebotomy.  Then you draw out a moderate amount of blood or according to what you see is needed.  Then you do the same with the other vein. Then you loosen the bandage.
And you bandage the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient does not choke.  And you leave him until the next day, for the wound heals. As for the veins beneath the tongue, the benefit of their phlebotomy after the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it benefits thrush in the mouth, corruption of the gums, malignant ulcers, chapped lips, and malignant sores.
which are in the nose and around it.  And the way to phlebotomize them is that you sit the patient in front of you and tighten his neck with a turban. Then you turn his lips and look at the two veins, one of which you see on the right of the lip and the other on its left, and you distinguish them by their blackness.
And that is also because around them are thin black veins, so you cut them with a blunt cut. If it is difficult for you and you do not know which they are, then aim to cut the largest and most visible of them. And likewise, do the same with the two veins that are in the lower lip.
As for the two veins that are under the tongue, the benefit of their phlebotomy after the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is for the angina that is in the throat from disease of the uvula and diseases of the mouth.  And the way to phlebotomize them is that you sit the patient between your hands, facing the sun, and you lift his tongue, and you look under the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and their color is blackish.
Then you phlebotomize them, and be careful not to cut them too deeply, for beneath them are arteries, and perhaps bleeding from those arteries may occur. As for the three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow, they are the ones that it is customary to phlebotomize in all people, and their phlebotomy is in two ways.
Either by puncturing with a broad myrtle-leaf lancet or an olive-leaf lancet, down to the thin one, or by incising with a scalpel lancet, which is the nashl [and this is its picture]. Picture of the broad myrtle-leaf lancet:
It is broad, as you see, so that it is suitable for opening hollow, full, prominent, apparent, thick veins that contain thick, turbid blood. And this is a picture of the olive-leaf lancet:
This lancet is less wide and thinner at the tip, suitable for phlebotomizing thin veins which contain thin, choleric blood.  And this is a picture of the nashl lancet:
This is the nashl, which is suitable for incising, and there are types of it, broad and thin, according to the width and narrowness of the veins.  And one can infer from this about others, and it is well known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from ailments that are below the throat and neck, from the side of the chest and abdomen. And the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy, should be cautious of it and take care, for beneath it is an artery. If he errs and inserts the lancet too deeply, he will sever that artery.
This will cause bleeding, therefore its phlebotomy should not be with a piercing lancet, but rather it should be incised with the nashl. If the basilic vein is not clearly visible, then it should be avoided and another vein selected or one of its branches sought.
Or, phlebotomize the cephalic vein in its place, for it is visible, and incise it with the nashl lancet as we have said. If you wish to phlebotomize the basilic vein itself, then, before tying the arm, you should palpate the area until you identify the location of the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and incise the vein obliquely with the nashl lancet as we have said, and take care that the incision falls far from the location of the artery.  Whenever, upon tightening the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you marked with ink, then that swelling is the distension of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood, upon phlebotomy, spurt like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, know that it is from the artery. Then, immediately place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, as it often does, then bandage the arm.
Leave it and warn the patient against neglecting it. Let it be supported and do not move it for days until it heals. If the bleeding does not stop and overpowers you, and you do not have medicine at hand, then cauterize the artery if it is visible to you, for its ends will contract and the bleeding will cease.
Or take a pistachio shell and split it, take one half, and tie it tightly over the site of the vein with the bandage and dressings until the next day. If the bleeding stops, then good. Otherwise, treat it with what was previously mentioned regarding the placement of styptic powders. Stopping its bleeding is not difficult in most cases.
Because of the small size of the wound and the effectiveness of the bandage on the arm, be aware of this. As for the cephalic vein, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body because it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have said.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be cautious when bleeding it, for beneath it is a nerve. If he goes too deep with the lancet and hits the nerve, numbness will occur in it, which is difficult to heal, and perhaps it will not heal at all. This nerve is often perceptible to the touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin and not apparent, then you should make your incision lengthwise with the lancet and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, then incise the vein lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for diseases of the eyes. For this vein, especially, it is necessary, if you want to bleed it, to bleed it by puncturing with the olive-shaped lancet or with the broad basil-shaped lancet because it is the safest of all the veins because there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
Except that you should, when performing phlebotomy, avoid the head of the muscle with the lancet and look for the soft area. It does no harm if you do not hit it on the first attempt to repeat the phlebotomy several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not bled on the first attempt.
But this swelling does not harm it at all. As for the method of phlebotomy, its complications, and what should be done beforehand in preparation for it, the first thing is that you should know that phlebotomy is either used to preserve health only.
Or it is used for illnesses.  The one used for preserving and maintaining health and preventing the occurrence of diseases should be phlebotomy in one of the three veins in the elbow, I mean the cephalic, median cubital, and basilic veins, and the phlebotomy should be at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
And the phlebotomy should be on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of the day have passed. As for the phlebotomy that is used for diseases, it has no specific time, but rather whenever the need and necessity for it arises, night or day.
And at any hour and at any time. Children should not be bled until they reach fourteen years of age, and the elderly who have passed sixty years of age should not be bled.  So, if someone intends to be bled for any reason.
It is necessary to cleanse his bowels before phlebotomy with a mild enema if there is a lot of retained waste, lest foul superfluities be drawn from the intestines to the veins during the phlebotomy, harming the principal organs. And one should not bleed someone who is suffering from nausea, is drunk, or intoxicated until that has passed.
And one should also avoid phlebotomy immediately after dysentery, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, staying up late, fasting, and anything that weakens the strength, whether physical or mental. Then consider thinning the humors before that if the blood is thick.
With foods and drinks and medicines, if possible. Then he should enter the bath if nothing prevents him, or engage in some exercise to thin the blood, and perform the phlebotomy in the middle of the day, as we have said, and he should aim to clear his mind that day of all bad psychological influences.
Such as worries, anger, and fear, and from all physical influences such as excessive fatigue, exhaustion, and intercourse, and so on. And his session should be attended by things that people are accustomed to using, such as various perfumes, fragrant plants, amusements, and so on, each person according to their means.
Then the phlebotomist sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being bled sits. Then he extends his arm and the phlebotomist rubs it with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the bandage with the tie and twists it two or three times, and the tightening should be moderate.
Because when the tightening is not moderate, either by excessive tightening, it prevents the flow of blood, or if it is too loose, it also prevents the flow of blood. Then, after tightening, the person being bled should rub his hands together.
Until the veins swell and become perceptible to the touch. Then the phlebotomist wipes the lancet with a little old oil, especially, then places his left index finger on the vein itself, below the place where he wants to bleed it slightly, so that the vein does not shift and he can avoid missing the target.
Because some veins you find like a tendon that shifts during bleeding, and some are filled with air, so when you place the lancet on them, they sink under the lancet and deceive the phlebotomist, and the lancet does not open the vein. And if it does open it, the opening will be narrow.
Therefore, the phlebotomist should be firm and deliberate in all these matters. Then he lowers the lancet. If it opens the vein on that first attempt, then fine. Otherwise, he tries again a little below that spot or above it quickly, if the area has not swollen. 
If the area swells or the patient becomes distressed, leave him for a day or two and do not tie the bandage, as it may bring on a hot swelling. And he should not enter the bath. Then he resumes bleeding if he wishes. If the lancet pricked the vein and the opening was small and the blood flow was thin.
And if you fear that the desired amount of blood will not come out, return the lancet to the same hole, gently and straight, and increase the opening slightly. Do this quickly before the area swells, because in many people the area swells with a small opening.
If you see that it has swollen, do not return to it at all, as it will not help you. Place some oil dregs on it, as this facilitates the flow of blood. It is better in this place than the oil itself and other ointments.  And so on.
So use oil dregs in all your vein bleeding when blood flow is difficult.  Theriac al-F훮r큰q and saxifrage can also do this if either of them is placed on the area, as the blood thins and dissolves if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the bleeding site, which often happens, especially for those who have not been bled except that once, or if the opening of the vein was small, then hasten to place on the swelling a sponge dipped in slightly warmed water and salt and tie it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
And you should do this after the blood has come out of the vein itself completely, or from another vein. If some blackness or greenness remains in the place after a few days, it will not harm. If you like, apply some dissolved aloe and myrrh.
Or some germander juice and the like. Often, swelling and flatulence occur when bleeding the basilic vein, so put your hand on it, and if you find it softens when you press on it, then that is bad flatulence, so beware of putting anything we have mentioned on it.
For arterial blood may flow from it, but bandage it with something astringent to harden the area, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. And it is necessary to remove from each person blood according to their strength and what appears from the dominant color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red, and likewise, if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins, and likewise, if it is sharp, until its sharpness goes away. And it is necessary for those who are full and strong and need to remove blood all at once.
to widen the opening of the vein and the lancet should be wide. And whoever is weak, the opposite of that, and it is necessary to remove it in stages, and the opening should be narrow. The best thing to use in phlebotomy is to be oblique, deviated, and incised, not punctured.
This type of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and from severing a nerve, and it is better and safer than transverse and longitudinal phlebotomy. And whoever habitually faints during phlebotomy, it is necessary to feed him, before phlebotomy, some bread soaked in pomegranate juice or oxymel.
If he has a hot temperament, let the blood be drawn in three or four stages. If he has a cold temperament, let him take, before phlebotomy, bread soaked in raisin wine or in honey syrup flavored with spices or in fragrant basil wine.
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy and its cause is the exit of much blood, then he should be given meat broth and thin basil drink and apply rosewater perfume, rubbing his chest with it, and use all that we have mentioned in the section on fainting in the chapter on divisions.
which occurs from excessive bloodletting. As for whoever wants to refresh his arm and release his blood again, it is necessary for someone who has been bled excessively and whose strength is weak to release the blood little by little, according to his strength, on successive days.
As for whoever wants to refresh his arm and release his blood again and has a strong body, let him do that seven or nine hours after his first phlebotomy.  As for whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it has flowed, it is necessary to refresh it for him on the second or third day.
As for someone whose body has an abundance of blood that has become hot and sharp and caused a fever, it is necessary to remove the blood all at once and remove a large amount and widen the opening until fainting occurs, after having observed all the conditions of phlebotomy.
And put your hand on his pulse as the blood flows lest death occur instead of fainting, as this often happens if the bloodletter is ignorant and careless.  And it is not necessary if you want to loosen the arm and release the blood again.
If the mouth of the vein has closed and the exit of blood has become difficult, do not squeeze it hard or twist it forcefully, for that is very bad. Rather, either leave it until you bleed it again or remove with the blade of the lancet what has congealed of the blood at the mouth of the vein.
Or apply to it some salt dissolved in water or apply to it some of the antidote *al-F훮r큰q* or *shakhzanaya,* and squeeze it gently until the blood comes out. If the vein has become swollen, leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity calls for releasing blood again and it is unavoidable, then either bleed it above that place or bleed it in the other arm or in the other vein.
As for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein of the arm, it is bled instead of the median cubital and basilic veins if they are not found or are hidden because it is composed of them.  The manner of its phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the forearm reddens and the vein appears clearly. Then tie above it with the bandage a slight, moderate tightening.
Then bleed the vein at a slight angle, neither transversely nor longitudinally, and let the opening be wide and your bleeding of it be a little above the wrist joint. If the exit of blood is difficult, put the hand back in the vessel with hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until it reaches your need. If you are in the summer days, you may dispense with putting the hand back in the hot water.  Putting the hand in hot water to make the blood flow is mostly done in winter. Phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all veins.
Because there is no pulsating artery or nerve under it. As for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments.  The way to bleed it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after placing it in hot water until the vein swells.
And it becomes very clear to the touch. Then phlebotomize it at a slight angle, and if you completely sever it, it will not harm it at all. Be careful not to go too deep with the lancet, for underneath it is the nerve of the fingers and the area is devoid of flesh. Then return the hand to the hot water.
And leave it to let the blood flow into it. For if you do not return it to the hot water, the blood will clot at the mouth of the vein and will be prevented from flowing. When you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, put fat and salt on the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
And you should do the same with any narrow branch.  As for the benefit of its phlebotomy from the left hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the spleen.  And you do with its phlebotomy just as you did with the other, in the same way.  As for the saphenous phlebotomy, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower body, such as uterine ailments.
And retention of menses and kidney diseases and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs and similar diseases. The way to phlebotomize it is to put his leg in hot water and massage it until the veins appear. Then tie above the ankle joint with a bandage, and the vein's location is at the heel, apparent towards the big toe.
And many branches spread from it on the surface of the leg, so phlebotomize it in its widest branch or at the heel where it converges, for that is best and safest.  If you phlebotomize it on the surface of the leg, beware of the nerves that are underneath it on the surface of the leg.
And make your incision for it obliquely as if you intend to sever it, and the lancet should be sharp. If the blood flow is difficult, let him put his leg back in the hot water and let the blood flow into it until it is finished. If the phlebotomist misses the vein with the lancet the first time,
let him repeat the phlebotomy a little higher, for the area is safe and there is no fear of a consequence if you are careful of the nerve, as we said. And you do the same with the saphenous vein of the other leg, in the same manner. As for the sciatic vein, its location is, as we said, at the heel on the lateral side. 
And the benefit of its phlebotomy is for hip pain if that is due to hot blood. The way to phlebotomize it is to have the patient enter the bath and relax. Then tie his leg from the hip to four fingers above the heel with a thin, long bandage, for it will not appear except by this.
When it appears, phlebotomize it in whichever manner works for you: either obliquely, which is best, or sever it completely, or incise it. For its location is safe. It is, in most people, very hidden, so if you do not find it,
and it does not appear to the senses at all, then phlebotomize some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little and ring fingers. Be careful of the nerves, and let the desired amount of blood flow.
Then loosen the bandage and place cotton on the site of the phlebotomy and bind the area, for it will heal quickly.
