Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Therefore, as Albucasis has completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, by completing it you will achieve its end, and by reading it, and by understanding it, I see that I should complete this treatise for you, which concerns surgery on the hand.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because surgery of the hand is entirely abandoned in our country and in our time, due to great peril, the science of it has diminished, and its tools have been lost; there remain only a few brief descriptions in the books of the ancients, which are mutilated and lead to error and confusion until their intentions are clarified and the strength of it is extended and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I should bring this treatise to life according to the method of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; so that it comes with the forms of the tools for cauterization and other instruments used in the work, as well as the addition of clarification, and preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason that a good artisan cannot be found in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and requires the practitioner to have been trained in anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joints and the shapes of the members, as well as their connection and separation; having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, as well as their number, and their origin; and the recognition of arteries, veins and quiet veins, and the locations for bleeding them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said in his work, "a name is much, but in small things, and especially in the art of surgery."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not knowledgeable in anatomy cannot avoid making errors that can lead to the death of men, as I have seen many times, for some are uneducated in this science and trust in their own ignorance and lack of experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck, which caused a large amount of blood to flow until the woman died among her relatives.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who believed that he could pull a stone from a man who was in agony, and the stone was large, but it came out and he cut a piece of the bladder while doing so, due to which the man died three days later.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for him to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the patient's condition, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took money from a duke of our land for surgery, and then operated on a black slave who had fractured his thigh; the doctor prepared him with his ignorance, extracted the fracture through an incision, using pulleys and splints with strong construction, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	He dressed the wound according to his desires, bandaged it, and left it closed for several days and commanded that we not undress him; until the thigh and leg became abscessed, and led to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and when I undressed the bandages, he found relief from his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that he could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who made an abscess cancerous and it became ulcerated after several days, until the evil of it was greatly magnified in the lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is because the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not need to be treated with every remedy, but rather an affected member that receives all its hostility.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that surgery of the hand should be divided into two categories: one is associated with health, and the other involves great risk in its execution.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already examined this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to be aware of this and to avoid it, so that the foolish do not deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your weapons with caution and protection from God, and your patients with joy and steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to achieve salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible maladies that are difficult to heal, and abandon your fears, so that you do not waver in your faith or your name: for more remains for your glory, and it will last in this world and beyond your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guidance has already been given in some of its teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad disease, so that wicked doctors do not become renowned."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Commence la division du livre et du premier de la première partie.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the feet, in the shapes of instruments and the types of cauteries, as well as what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is about blisters and perforations, about bleeding and ulcers, and about the extraction of boils and similar afflictions, all categorized and arranged in the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of twists and similar afflictions; the chapter is dedicated to the feet, and organized according to the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	With the use of a cautery heated by fire and with sharp medicine, remember the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Know what the quality of the juxtaposed components of that cautery and its potential disadvantages are, and in which circumstances the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore say that the discourse on the quality of the component of the cautery and its disadvantages is long, detailed, scientific, and somewhat cryptic; many wise men have spoken about it extensively, and they disagree on the subject, and I shall only touch upon one of their discourses, fearing to prolong the discussion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore say that cauterization generally concerns all material or materials, with the exception of two cases, which are cases where caution is contraindicated.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry and hard matter, there is disagreement; some argue that caution is beneficial in this case, while others argue the opposite, claiming that caution is not appropriate for sickness that is caused by quality and dryness, as nature itself is both quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient to treat a dry and hard affliction with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say this about the one who disagrees with that argument, stating that caution is useful for all dry and hard afflictions found in human bodies, as when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the nature of fire, it overpowers the body of a man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And say this on behalf of the one who disagrees, that I have tried it in certain situations and found evidence to support his argument.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is essential that we examine this matter in depth, as the one who argues in favor of caution has already been experienced and exercised in the chapter of cauterization in past practice, and he is aware of the diversity of human conditions and the nature of their afflictions, their causes, their manifestations, and the length of time for each.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other cases, it is not a matter of fear, especially for soft and moist afflictions, as all doctors have already agreed on these, and they are not divided on the usefulness of caution in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And sons, understand that the secret of curing with fire and caution lies in cautery combined with medicine, as fire is simple, the action of which only affects the member that is cauterized and does not harm any other member unless there is a small disadvantage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicine burns towards that in the members which it is applied to, and it strongly drives sickness in the afflicted member of difficult healing and strong pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, through its excellence and goodness, does not do this only but rather exceeds it, and it is already known to us by experiment and long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused for the length of the sermon, except that it is not lawful for me in this pause to reveal secretly hidden by the fire, and the quality of the operation on the body and its expulsion through which you expel sicknesses, philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve to sharpen your pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to make cauteries and pause in the best time of springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the advantage of what is attracted by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, which do not suffer delay, since it is feared that the one who comes with evil intention is greater than small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so do not eat in your feet, or sons, that is not valued except by the common people and foolish doctors, because that illness which is cured by cauterization is not always resolved and they delay its outcome.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think for that, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistures which are the reason for the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nonetheless, cauterization is excessive over the medicine due to its desire for its power and virtue and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some time in the future, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as its properties, and what is prepared in their body due to the accumulation of superfluidities in them, and what is obtained by them through their diet and similar causes; except that the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in parts with few superfluidities and moistures, such as cauterizing teeth for pain and similar, it is possible that in it the pain will not return, but rather a small one.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and that is incorrect, not according to what I understand in it, because I believe that it is not healing that improves with medicine or any other cause related to cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is the opposite of that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the illness, a person is given cauterization, and it improves in it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here is the correction for the last sentence:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this for the equality of gold and the exalted nature of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not harm, as that is not absolutely true, because I already have this proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies and cauterization with it is good and better than iron as they said; but when you perform cauterization with fire from gold, it is not clear to you, because it depends on the amount that you want for its redness, and it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust above the flame, the gold melts due to the heat of the fire, and in the fire some layers are formed so that the craftsman can cauterize through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore, cauterization with iron should be done gently and then more firmly in order to correct the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have also ordered those of the head within the feet, so that you can lighten your request for it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterizing pain in the head due to coldness and moistness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization provides relief from both coldness and moistness in the affected area, which are two causes of scurvy and excessive flow of mucus, called corrhea, from the head to the parts of the ears and nose fluidity, as well as excessive sleeping, tooth pain and gout, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a medicinal laxative for three or four nights, according to the properties of the illness, and their age and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then you command him to shave his head with a razor and then he should sit on a chair with his feet resting on your hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then you place the edge of your palm approximately at the level of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But since your hand position is not yet clear, mark that location with a probe and then apply the olive oil-based cauterizer in this manner:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then you place it there on the indicated location, in such a way that it descends, with your hand moving downwards, and your grip gradually tightens as you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then you lift your hand lightly and observe the location, and if you see some amount of bone emerging from the head, such as the size of a grain of wheat, you raise your hand and if it does not return to its place with that iron, another one of it, if it is cold, until the bone is visible where I told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place a cushion over the wound covered by it, that which should destroy the scar of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster containing four medications over the affected area until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the wound remains open for a long time, let it be treated with honey, as it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They say that the vertebra should be burned with cautery and held until a piece of the bone is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then scrape off that which is attached to the bone, and let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others say that with cautery reaching the bone, it should be strongly applied to the bone until the bone breaks, and this is the method of amputation in small places.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that from that place escape the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Let the wound remain open for a long time, and apply remedies to heal it until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen both kinds of cautery for all cases, but only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, you should do what is better for health, as the head is more susceptible to solubility due to continuity of this kind, as has been proven in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of free nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is more effective and should be preferred; and that one and that operation are for the sake of health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Chapter of the head cauterization:
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, use weapons, scissors, tweezers, plasters, ointments, gauze, needles, liniments, and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery that does not help in any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation by nature; and it is not free and has a large inflammation, then cauterize it again with another cautery after a short time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the corner of the patient's head with cautery until the vertebra is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vertebra and expose the amount that has been determined and cauterize it with one cautery in the rear part of the head at the location called "vas" - and that is the location where a bladder-like protrusion occurs.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And do not expose the bone, because the patient suffers great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery with which the corners of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle than the cautery used for other parts of the head; and this is the method.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Chapter of modern amputation:
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain in the head part swells or pain enters into the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that alleviate the condition, and the other cure (which I have called remedies for illnesses); but if this does not help, cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterization with a burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	A hot iron tool is taken, sharpened at both ends and applied to the temples of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the location of pain on the temple with a sharp, small knife, but deep enough to create a hollow, yet not visible.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Apply pressure with a cloth on the previously constricted area and leave it for three hours; then remove the linen, and let the plaster remain for two or three days, and place a bandage over the submerged area until the wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Cure that (the wound) with mouth rinses until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some burning medicines that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Cauterization with iron follows this method: the form of fire used for cauterization is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clamp nail, because the head of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the location of pain, and hold it - so as not to injure the archery which is below - and turn the small iron slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity that is injured by the tip of the knife is not too much and the hand is raised to prevent the artery which is below from being injured, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Apply cotton to the area in salt water and let it stay there for three days; then bandage the area with linen, and cure it with mouth rinses until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, cauterize the end of the scythe with caution, and be careful not to make an incision in the artery in this new method which is not traditional.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the ancient method of cauterization for migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with the remedies mentioned in the previous cure and in the remedies for illnesses, and the cure does not work, or when the disease is not cured by the first cauterization with burning medicine or cauterization with fire, then it becomes necessary to ignite the scythe cautery before it turns white (meaning place a line of long length over the location of pain, the thickness of which is the width of the finger, or whatever that may be); and after waiting a while, press down on it and make an incision in the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the jawbone, which is detrimental to chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves which support that, and that it does not result in spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of bleeding from the artery that is cut, because in cutting there is fear, and especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not learned or experienced; and let the operation begin at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	I will remember the regulation of bleeding from an accident of the artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that is not cured by this cauterization and if you find the patient's body tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the cauterization that was mentioned in the chapter on compression of the artery with cauterization using two knives, and this is the best and most suitable cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to cold and is treated with cooling causes and the other cure (which was mentioned in the division) does not alleviate the pain, then apply fire, which is called puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Place the puncta in the fire and bring it to the environment of the entire ear like a wheel that is rolled, or in the vicinity of each example if the pain is in one place.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Approach the ear with the cauterizing tool of the razor little by little, but with caution so as not to injure the location you are trying to reach.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of all the points is throughout the entire area, and that which is affected heals, then care for the areas within until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	If the cautery of all the points is applied throughout the whole region, and what has been affected heals, then attend to the areas affected until they are healed (or cured).
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Treatise on Cauterization of Gout.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout, which is cured by cauterization, is not other than the species that comes from arrows, as it has been said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the species that enter through dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout with herbs and purges and ointments, and do not find relief from your treatment, then you must necessarily cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one must be made at the region, the second one a little lower near the temple, and the third one should join the edges of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Place the cautery against the affected part in a manner contrary to the direction of the illness, for relief is not found except at the point where it heals.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The manner of cauterization is to cauterize that part with the cautery in the direction of the end of the affected area, and then a little above the ear, and at the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and after placing your hand with the cautery over the affected area until it has been burned to the extent that the quantity of the affected part has been consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the shape of the cautery, and it is the type of knife, whose shape is flat.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, because it must be very sharp, you should not leave too much excess coarseness on it; it is necessary to grind it in the place of excessive coarseness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Care for the area with what is before processing until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Treatise on Cauterization of Burns.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy occurs and the treatment for it has been described but not followed, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: primarily on all the corners of his head; and in the middle of his head, as mentioned; and in his neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for cauterization is done as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more posterior; and it should be cured with what is appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the Cauterization of Forgetfulness Caused by Fever.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient should be given large pills at the beginning, which will help to purify him.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the patient's entire head and place an ointment on his neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Leave it for several days, because this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do as ordered by that medicine, which has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If it cures well in this manner, then do nothing more; but if not, perform three cauterizations on the lower part of his head, which should descend from the most superior part of his head to the lower part of his neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Leave a gap between each cauterization and care for the cauterized area with what is appropriate.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you wish to be more daring and the patient is tolerant of it, then cauterize in the middle; but if you want even more, then cauterize it on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for the cauterized area until it is healed and the cauterizations are olive-shaped, as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the Cauterization of Paralysis and the Softening of the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Treat the head with pills and what has been mentioned previously; then shave the patient's head, cauterize it in the middle of his head, on all corners of his head, on the lower part of his head, and three cauterizations on the spinal vertebrae of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the softening of the body in cases of dropsy and the patient is tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and later a cauterization to burn through the thick skin, and raise your hand above it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Care for the cauterized area until it is healed and the cauterizations are olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy itself is not cauterized, but that epilepsy caused by fever is.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you should purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and the other treatment mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, administer gurgles and teething remedies to help purify him for several days with good food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it in the middle of his head according to the previous method, and another cauterization on the back of his head, and one on each corner of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize it with cauterizations as described (paralysis and softening of the body on the spinal vertebrae of the neck and back).
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	The cauterizations should be olive-shaped, as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, pause with subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and a severe fever, cauterize it with the cauterizations as described in the paralysis division.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluidity that declines into melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, give him what purifies his brain according to what has been described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, make a tourniquet around it, and leave it in place on his forehead.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be completely undressed and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	A balm is applied; it is more appropriate to use an ancient sheep balm.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat it over the fire at a moderate temperature, which he will endure when it is placed on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Place it on his forehead in the circle and leave it until it is absorbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And perform this procedure on the patient every week, accompanied by the proper regimen until they are well; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to what is most necessary, unless you have a cautery of this kind prepared: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equal proportion.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that sore in bandaging or in gray plaster of Paris.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water descending in the bladder.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have recognized the onset of water in the bladder by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that purifies their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him soak in bath with alum for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot on the head with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if there is the beginning of urinary discharge from two bladders, or one cauterization if it is the beginning of water in one bladder.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make an incision with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that are underneath the coccyx; and make the cauterizations in that long area at the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful to prevent bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is within your ability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge concerning the extraction of arteries, the incision of them, and caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck on both sides with two cauterizations at the lower part of the neck.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the bladders are old and persistently caused by veins and arteries manifest in the place of the head outside, and it is verified that it is excessive fluid, then cauterize that with the cautery as mentioned in the chapter on urinary discharge in the bladders, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauterizations at both temples, and two cauterizations at both neck bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it requires addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the bladder at the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nose smell (nasal stench).
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that which I have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and give the patient chamomile tea for three nights; shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that on the eyelashes with carnation cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows above the small hairs.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut any arteries when doing so.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The form of the carnation cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening of eyelids from the bladder.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the bladder is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery using this lunar cautery. And here is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are performing the cauterization, do it on both eyebrows with a small cautery and two cauterizations in every section, extending from one temple to the other.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let each cauterization be as long as the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the thickness of the section of the eyelid that is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the eyelid of the bladder when the hair has turned into the sections and the bladder is hardened.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the bladder has turned into the sections and pierces the bladder, cauterize in those areas using two methods: cauterization can be done with heat or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a heated cautery is applied to the affected area, tell the patient to lower their pants as they do when washing themselves, until it is prolonged and bound; and if you puncture that area, then bind it with a bandage so that it does not become infected until the skin heals.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then raise the head of the patient and hold your hand over the eyelids of their wounds with a cloth bearing the symbol of the fern leaf, starting from the skin area.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply warm oil or chicken broth on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring the heated cautery with this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the area marked by the symbol, little by little, with observed burn marks, until the surface of the skin is burned like fern leaves, completely apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing from your work is that the eyelid of the wound is contracted and the skin around it raised after the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and leave it there for three days, then cover the area with stitches until the scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the skin around it returns for any cause and the eyelid becomes soft, then apply the heated cautery to it again in the same manner as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the skin is on the eyelid and it drops down, then cauterize it so that it returns to its original position, closes, and the skin does not puncture the wound again.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery with medicine is burning this means that you should tell the patient to lower their pants until it is prolonged and bound, and prepare a paper or cloth in the shape of a fern leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known sage and fresh cow's urine. .i., And mix these ingredients well, and do it with haste so that it is not spoiled; then spread this mixture over the cloth shaped like a fern leaf, placing it on one or both of the wounds; then cover the wound area with warm oil, and place the patient's head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then place the patient on the medicine and press it gently so that they do not move until they feel the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, when the patient perceives that the herb is biting them, remove the medicine and cover it with your hand; therefore, when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; then consider if the eyelid has been lifted like it should be washed with fire or cut, for this is good; and if it does not return to its place after being removed from the medicine on the area where there was no pressure applied, then put the medicine back over that spot until your operation is complete and the wound is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the area with stitches until the skin of the adhesion is removed, and care for it until the adhesion is completely healed or until it is treated with another method.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep a close watch during your operation so that no pus from the wound drips onto the medicine; if after several days the eyelid becomes soft and some skin around it punctures the wound, then repeat your treatment over the affected area in the same manner as at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the mastic tree leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that men's hernias are of various sizes and shapes, so accordingly make your treatment.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the path of right direction to him who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula which is in the eyelid hernia.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as I have said in the division of diseases and do not make your treatment, then you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to put his head in your lap, and let some servant hold his head between yours in such a way that he is neither harmed nor agitated by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a piece of cotton soaked in oil or bird glue on the hernia of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And approach the cauterizing instrument which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is hollow, as is the form of a reed or a feather quill, from one end of which the cauterizing tool is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you wish, enter it into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, withdraw it thus.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the hollow one is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and drain and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand on the cauterizing instrument which is well ignited, and you with your other hand should hold the cauterizing tool at the edge of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and then press the cauterizing tool on the hernia and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if the cauterization reaches the bone at first, that is good; otherwise, you should make the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then press on that spot with a linen cloth and cover it with a dry dressing until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then press on it with a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as needed according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula which some people have said is: enter the location of the fistula and close it, then place a fine thread in that fissure, which has the form of a needle: And the quantity of the lead was one inch melted; and you with your hand hold the needle well, so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead should not reach the hernia of him; and it is necessary that you press on the hernia of the patient with cotton soaked in oil or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization and treatment that I have said, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer nose drops and reduce the fistula into the nose as appropriate in its location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fissure of the head.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Most often, fissures occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures as I have said in the division and your treatment is not successful, then ignite a small, sharp scissors-shaped cauterizing instrument according to this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the concavity of it according to the fineness of the scissors.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Press that edge carefully into those fissures until the cauterizing tool reaches the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with a kerocote until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth a pustule is formed and a boil is made, and it breaks, and it becomes old, and it makes a fistula, and you treat it and your treatment is not successful, then it is necessary that you ignite a cauterizing instrument according to the quantity received in the fistula, and then place the ignited tool in the fistula hole, and with your hand bring it to the root of him, and at the end do this once or twice; and treat it with what I have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is drained and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and scrape the rotten bone according to its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Treatment of cauterization of teeth and softening of ulcers.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When ulcers are softened by moisture and teeth are damaged, and you cannot heal them with medicine, then place the patient's head on your lap, bring the cautery near that is suitable for this purpose, ensure the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and move the heated cautery several times according to your will.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient rinses their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, then stop it because the damaged tooth is closed, the swollen gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Treatment of tooth pain by cauterization.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by inflammation or worms, or medicine does not heal it, then cauterize the area in two ways: either with a cowhorn cautery, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	A cowhorn cautery is obtained by taking a cow's horn and heating it in an iron pot, then selecting a small piece of the heated horn and wrapping it in linen cloth, immersing it in water, and placing it on the painful tooth quickly until it becomes hot.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then move the heated horn cautery several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse linen or a piece of cloth in the hot horn cautery, place it on the painful tooth, and hold it there until the heated iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization by fire method has the drawback that you must be careful with the coal or iron, and there should not be any large protrusions in the area to prevent the heat of the fire from reaching the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery in a suitable manner, and place it on the tooth until it becomes hot, and do this several times as needed to alleviate the pain either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to use pressure on the cautery so that the patient holds their mouth open with a good bite and keeps it there for an hour, then spit it out. This is the method of using the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize only the affected area as much as is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula (a hollow tube used for medical procedures):
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Treatment of hernias by cauterization.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by inflammation and cold humors that do not respond to medicine and you want to treat them gently, then heat the cautery in a suitable manner (as described below), holding both ends so that the smoke escapes through one end, and apply the heated cauterizer to the abscess for a moment. If necessary, repeat this process until it reaches the base of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and apply the linen for three days on it, and pause over the affected area until the fluid inside has been completely burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Approach it with warm cloths and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the syringe or the cautery should be suitable for this purpose.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of throat warts and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the trachea of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by inflammation, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that affected place at the location of the goiter.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to burn the goiter with the cautery or burn its surrounding tissue, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that affected place at another joint of the neck on the lower spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery used should be sharp, following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Approach it with the warm cloths and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to humidity, the patient does not have a fever or thick phlegm, and it is an old sickness, then cauterize that affected place with two cauteries on the furcula at the tender spots on both sides; and with another cautery in the middle of the thigh between two nipples; and let the cauteries be sharp, following the previously described method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization can be made with the type of cautery called a punctum, which is described in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And place points at those areas; and approach it with warm cloths and bandages until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauteries have three arms, since cauterization is done with this method: once a day you can perform three cauterizations in this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of twitching, which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is displaced due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its place during the time of its return, then you must bring it back until it has returned to its usual position, and you must gently move it so that it can be dislocated in the opposite direction, as we have witnessed, then you should first reduce the displacement, and place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the surrounding tissue which is inside the area of the twitching to the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is displaced internally.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach with fire the cautery that has two heads, and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Approach and cauterize the surrounding tissue so that it penetrates through to the other side, and the figure of cauterization will then come out with four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it should be delicate according to the thickness of the tissue; and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And adjust it according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And pause over the cautery for a time with salt, and place the patient in quietness, and let the affected limb not be painful for any length of time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is at the upper joint and the humidity is removed as described earlier, then you cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or multiple pointed cauteries, since the joint is confirmed and the humidity is drained and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is movement and humidity in the stomach that spreads throughout its expanse and multiplies its rooms, and if you continue with the methods of treatment but it does not improve, then you must place the patient on their back, extend their arms and legs, and approach with three cauteries: one cautery below the thigh at the thickness of a finger, and two cauterize below the ribs of the caution, until the triangle-shaped figure of the cautery appears; and elongate those that are not aligned to produce an opening.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two thirds of the thickness of the surrounding tissue.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be as follows, without addition. If you wish, cauterize with the large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; and let this be a cautery shaped like a circle according to this shape:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is to be cauterized in the one who is afraid of this cautery: and it is that you sign on the stomach according to the amount that you wish to test, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery at the points; and then care for it with the treatment that follows until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	I apologize for the confusion, but there seems to be a missing part in your text. The previous lines seem to indicate a medical treatise or a chapter (Capitol), but the line you provided does not have any context and appears as a standalone sentence. Therefore, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation without knowing the context or the structure of the document. If possible, could you please provide more context or the full text so I can assist you better?
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of the Frightened Pulse (Title)
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the feet due to coldness, moisture or excessive gas within it before being displaced from its normal position by excess fluid, and the patient is cured with what has been said and nothing more, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, and three cauterizations are made according to this form and quantity on the feet behind the hip bones, the one on the side of a man's decubitus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of the foot, and let the cauterizations be in line with the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of the medicine applied is not appropriate to the size of the wound, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, which you have already spread their legs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have the skill and discretion in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and be sure to disinfect the entire wound so that the entire body is affected and reaches the intestines, for the wound here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here is the translation of the text you provided:
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of Foot Apostema with Cautery (Title)
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or apostema arises in the foot and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in its sheath (tunica), then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels heaviness and pain without being aggravated.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the sheath (tunica) of the foot, pain becomes intense and often exhausts doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient lies on their back; and show the location of the abscess with a finger (or other pointing instrument); and ignite the cautery, similar to a rag, in the form described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize with that and cauterize the abscess until the entire wound is burned (coagulated), until it reaches the cavity, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with the treatment of other abscesses until healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	It is not necessary to use this type of cautery unless it has been studied in the art of medicine for a long time and in which many diseases have been known; however, it is better to learn about this operation by trying it several times, but do not neglect it, and it is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Plaura (Title)
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients performed cauterization of plaura (plague) by burning it with a long dry cautery from the art of surgery in this manner, and you will take one of the long dry cauteries found from the art of surgery, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Let it (the cautery) be submerged in oil and ignite it in the fire, then cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauterizations on each side, one slightly descending below the beard, and two cauterizations in the area that descends between the fifth rib and the sciatic notch, descending a little towards the back; and another in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the sides of the body; and one cautery in the location between the shoulders, and two cauteries on either side of the foot, below the cautery that is between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it's not necessary to close your hand around the cautery, rather let it be in the open during the operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient men used a cautery of iron similar to a ray and heated it up. They placed that in the location between the ribs until they reached the abscess and it was opened, as we said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, there is no fear during this perforation with the cautery, because death often occurs in the place of the fistula where no healing takes place.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the liver.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating liver disease with the methods we have mentioned for division, do not use your own method, rather cauterize in that area according to three ways, all of which are permissible, of which one is to make three or four stitches along the length of the liver according to the figure of the cauteries in the foot, whose figure has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness between each cauterization should be the size of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as the method we mentioned in the cautery of the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not close your hand around the cautery; rather, let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and lift the skin that is at the end of the liver so that the patient can lie on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you lift the skin according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring the two prongs together, ignite them quickly, and penetrate the skin of the other part at that point.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And remove the cautery; therefore four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And take care to cure the cautery as it has been said to soak it in vinegar for several days, because that is more effective than the other causes mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydropisis.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in hydropisis, but in an artery properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydropisis with the methods we have mentioned for division and you do not use your own method, it is necessary to cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the foot, another cautery on the liver, two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the center of the leg, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate for the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery be soaked in vinegar so that it can be used for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment with the cautery without those things that are necessary for healing, and rather hasten it with assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to treat the abdomen should be as described before, and it is that one which is used to treat the back, according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and on sores.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the heel at the point between the little toe and the big toe, and lift your hand off the cautery and do not twist it; and raise your hand, and do not return it completely, because the stagnant water runs out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this way: Place two cauteries on each sore, and in each sore make a cautery with the tip of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Make the cauteries in accordance with the length of the sore: Place one on the left side and the other below the middle of the sore; and on each sore two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	When the wound remains open for a long time because some water persists in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal organ becomes weakened and humidity enters it, causing its digestive and retentive functions to weaken, which are in the stomach and the intestines, it is treated with various methods of treatment but does not improve, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization with a strong cautery, then cauterize that area with a large cautery on the stomach as described in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a sharp cautery; and with a cautery on the incision on the side of a large alkatin or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if excessive humidity persists and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the pelvis and intestines, and apply two strong cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, because this is a perfect cure for the problem, without any error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When ancient hemorrhoids are caused by nature or thick humors or decayed humidity, and are not cured with the methods mentioned in the division, then cauterize it with three cauteries on the tip of the coccyx at the base of the small triangle, and with a cautery above the navel through both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the person is swollen and the food inside it is not spoiled, and the face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a sharp cautery, leave the cautery open for some time until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The correct translation of "De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor." from the given text is: "For the cauterization of an abscess, approach the hernia."
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	The correct translation of "Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray." from the given text is: "When you remove an abscess, you ignite the cautery that resembles a ray."
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The correct translation of "Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc." from the given text is: "Approach that abscess with the ignited cautery, and insert your hand as far as it can reach to bring the cautery to the opening of the vein from which blood flows."
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The correct translation of "E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achievel son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat." from the given text is: "And do this once or twice, for if the abscesses are multiple, cauterize each of them according to what you have counted, and treat those with pus until they are healed."
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	The correct translation of "E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament." from the given text is: "And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it will heal more slowly."
Capitol .xxxvi.	The correct translation of "Capitol .xxxvi." from the given text is: "Chapter XXXVI." (Note that this is not part of the previous translations, but rather a numbering system indicating a new chapter.)
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The correct translation of "De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu." from the given text is: "On cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in their divisions."
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	The correct translation of "Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri." from the given text is: "If nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, heal with a cautery."
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	The correct translation of "Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta." from the given text is: "Therefore, when someone sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupts running sores and pus, it is necessary to probe that with a fine needle and approximate the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned needle."
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	The correct translation of "Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray" from the given text is: "Approach with the ignited cautery resembling a ray".
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	The correct translation of "E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta." from the given text is: "And insert that ignited cautery into this fistula according to the depth that the needle penetrates."
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The correct translation of "E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquells cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat." from the given text is: "And repeat the cautery over that area until the corrupt flesh is burned quickly one or two or three times, according to your necessity."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	The correct translation of "E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant." from the given text is: "And be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, take care of all those places; do not do this unless the fistula is in a meaty place and you think it is not penetrating."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The correct translation of "E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat" from the given text is: "And treat that area until it is healed."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	The correct translation of "E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament." from the given text is: "And if the area is sealed and the matter is drained away, remaining in this state for a long time, you will know that it has been healed completely."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	The correct translation of "E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc." from the given text is: "And if the matter is not drained away, you will know that it is penetrating or in the opening of the bone and rotting, or be aware of those causes that may arise in its place."
Capitol .xxxvii.	The correct translation of "Capitol .xxxvii." from the given text is: "Chapter XXXVII." (Note that this is not part of the previous translations, but rather a numbering system indicating a new chapter.)
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The correct translation of "De cauterizacio dels ronhos" from the given text is: "On cauterization of hiccups."
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	The correct translation of "Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio." from the given text is: "When pain occurs in hiccups due to irritation or congestion, and the patient's throat is swollen, it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hiccups with a cautery on each hiccup using a cautery with a pointed end that has been previously heated."
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	The correct translation of "E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament." from the given text is: "And hold the cautery slightly weakly for a short while, so that three cauterizations will be applied, and thus they will heal more slowly."
Capitol .xxxviii.	The correct translation of "Capitol .xxxviii." from the given text is: "Chapter XXXVIII." (Note that this is not part of the previous translations, but rather a numbering system indicating a new chapter.)
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	The correct translation of "De cauterizacio de la vesica" from the given text is: "On cauterization of the bladder."
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	The correct translation of "Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am altre en la senestra de lu." from the given text is: "When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to irritation and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold in their urine, you must cauterize it below the bladder area where the pubic hair begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the wound; and cauterize that area with a single cautery in the lowest part of the foot, or with two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Each cautery should be as long as is appropriate for the wound.
Capitol .xxxix.	The next sentence does not appear to be part of a specific numbered section in the text provided. Here are the translations for the sentences:
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Here comes the translation for the title:
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When gout occurs with swelling and moisture, it is forbidden to engage in sexual activity, and the menstruation of the person is spoiled and delayed, and there will be pain in that area, which requires that the location be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries, and let the cauteries be long.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are poured into the ankle joint and cause swelling of the joint site, and it is recognized that the limb becomes extended beyond the other when compared with it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is located where there is a break.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery because you will have signaled the circle around the joint as it rotates in this way, and in this way the joint falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery mentioned above be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present with you, then cauterize it with three cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the cautery be made according to the size of the wound in its entirety; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with the medicine that we have said before and do not confuse it with another, which is ancient, and therefore it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors using fumigated pills or artificial pills or similar, and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicines, or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	If according to two known methods, one of which is that you cauterize it on the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries in this way: make sure they are at good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the size of a finger, and if it is a large olive-shaped or round cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery should be on the other side of the ankle joint, where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape has been described in the cauterization of the ankle dislocation and which contains and burns the entire wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is located at the ankle and does not extend into the limb.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the limb, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the limb at the place where the pain is located; and with one cautery over the hip for a short distance.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a cutting cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the size of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient has pain that extends to the location near the feet, then you cauterize it here where the pain is located with a three-point or four-point cautery or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient has pain behind the thigh, then you cauterize it here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cauterizations be careful not to burn the nerve or large vessel, and for this reason you will harm the patient unnecessarily or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, the leg swelled up to the foot, and the fire burnt through and rotted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And beware of this solution for the stomach, for it is fatal.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two joints, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise say that in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the method of the cautery: make it in the shape of a circle of iron with a circumference equal to that of a palm; and let its orifice be according to the thickness of a date seed or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle should be another third; and the space, which is equal to the knuckle of the thumb, should be between them; and those circles should be opened in two parts; and the length of those keys should be one or two knuckles, and make the edges of iron in those circles well decorated; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then heat it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the divided part of the thumb, with the patient holding onto the sides.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore, cauterize that area with three cauterizations in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Leave it alone for three days, apply a dressing with bandaging and leave the wound open for several days, and treat it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diyas Albucasis: or my sons, we have rarely used this type of cauterization due to the fear of its appearance and because few have found those who observed it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Moreover, of the various cauterizations, it is the one that alleviates pain and finds the location of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Moreover, cauterization with medicinal powders should be done in two circles, each having a perforated armillary sphere containing the iron hook at its bottom; the length of the wall on the inner circumference should be two knuckles or whatever is appropriate.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space is equal to the thickness of a finger, it should be opened both below and above, and they should contain the following:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place it on the divided part of the thumb, with the patient holding onto the sides, and compress your hand on the divided part of the thumb; then take some hot water in a bowl, mix it between two circles, and let the quality of that be similar to a small fire slowly growing, hold it for about an hour, and make the patient endure the biting and burning sensation - for that reveals the pain as if from fire - until the burning sensation stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash the hot water from the entire thumb with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Leave it alone for three days and place the dressing on it until the blackness of the burn has subsided, leave it alone for several more days, and it will heal; this is the last step in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Treat it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the abdomen or chest, make a statue of it that contains water in the same way as was done for the thumb.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	The recipe is for lime and vinegar, each part divided one, and mix and let it rest in a new layer of water, where the other part is perforated with a small hole according to the amount that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Let the other water layer rest for some time, then pour over it alive lime and vinegar which takes up those (impurities) with a finger, and when you compress them with a soft cloth for good compression, let the hole that came from the sharp water in the other water layer close.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour over it more alive vinegar and fresh lime, because at this point it will be of strong acidity, which is used in many medical operations and in cauterizing other members, as this operation works by heat.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	These are some of the medicines that require cauterization in a wide area, such as tar, honey, and vinegar mixed with sulfur.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	The Gallic remedy from an ancient man is described for the operation and cure of pain in the loins and sciatica, and it is truly a great one, and says that no other treatment is needed, and it heals quickly like this, as recommended, because the person who tried it before confirmed it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	This means that green mustard seed should be taken if a spasm is detected, but if no spasm is found, ripe figs should be taken instead; and it should be mashed with a little salt and placed on the area of pain (loins, chest, or legs), and left there.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	This means it should be left for three hours or the amount that the patient can tolerate with moderation regarding the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	This means bring that person to bath and when their body is heated, immerse them in the sun, because the pain will stop and it will heal.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	This means you should know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines, but rather the purification of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	This passage appears to say that according to Hippocrates (Escorides), when a vein is stretched with a sheep's wound, it should be cauterized and this will improve the situation; the cauterization should be done in this way: take wool and immerse it in old oil, and place it between the toes and the hollows.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry sheep's wound and inflate it with fire until carbon is formed; then place it on the wool and let it enter where it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	This means apply this (remedy) and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the loins and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This means that this method of cauterization is called cauterization by cows (or cow branding).
Capitol .xlii.	This is likely just a Roman numeral indicating chapter 42. Without more context, it's difficult to determine what the exact meaning or relevance of this number is within the text. It could refer to a specific chapter or section in a medical treatise or other document being discussed, but further information would be needed to accurately interpret its significance.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	This means "on the cauterization of pain in the teeth". This suggests that the text is discussing a method for treating tooth pain using cauterization or heat application. The use of this treatment on the teeth may be intended to alleviate discomfort, promote healing, or stop bleeding caused by an injury or infection in the mouth. Without more context, it's difficult to determine the specific details of this treatment method.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains occur in the lower part (of the body) due to various causes, such as injury or trauma, or excessive discharge, and similar causes, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Do not use cautery except in this special case, which is caused by an effusion (overflow) of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuate the patient using pills and similar substances, which should be placed on the affected area where there is pain three fingers' breadths in length according to its latitude (depth), but not more than two cauterizations or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the substance.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Make a cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a medium-sized needle in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43. This appears to be a chapter title in a medical treatise. The Roman numerals (capitolo xliii) are often used in medieval texts, especially those influenced by Latin. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact meaning of this line.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice. This appears to be a topic or subject related to the previous chapter title (Chapter 43). However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact meaning and relationship between these lines in the text.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it occurs during their development, causing swelling and elevation (enlargement) of the structure, along with movement. It's possible to interpret this as a description of symptoms related to jaundice or liver issues, but without more context, it's difficult to confirm this interpretation.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it thickens in the lower vertebra of the back and those closer to it, which begins to protrude above the other vertebrae. This statement appears to describe the progression or location of a condition affecting the spine or back, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature of this issue.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to prevent it, cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following manner: This sentence suggests that the previous description of a condition or symptom is something that can be treated or prevented through cauterization. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature of the treatment being discussed.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	take the cautery and apply it over the entire affected vertebra. This statement appears to describe a specific action related to the previous description of treating or preventing a condition affecting the spine. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature of this treatment or its intended purpose.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three fingers' width. This statement seems to describe the specific method for carrying out the previous suggestion of applying caution to treat or prevent a condition affecting the spine or back. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature of this treatment and its intended purpose.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These points should be close together. This statement appears to provide guidance on the placement of cauterization points during the treatment or prevention of a condition affecting the spine, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And provide care to the area where healing will occur with what has been mentioned (previously discussed). This statement appears to suggest that the previous guidance on cauterization is intended to promote healing in the affected area, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful not to use cautery in jaundice caused by nerve spasm. This statement appears to provide a caution or warning against using cauterization as a treatment for jaundice that originates from nerve spasm, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the reason for this caution and its significance in the overall discussion of treatments.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44. This appears to be another chapter title in a medical treatise. The Roman numerals (capitolo xliv) are often used in medieval texts, especially those influenced by Latin. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact meaning of this line.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization for gout and joint pain. This appears to be a topic or subject related to the previous chapter title (Chapter 44). However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact meaning and relationship between these lines in the text.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This statement appears to describe a condition related to the joints or muscles of the body, specifically gout, which is often characterized by painful inflammation in the feet. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this discussion.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, since gout is treated by a cold treatment method and the pain is not cured (resolved), you should use cauterization as a last resort. This statement appears to provide guidance on treating or managing gout, suggesting that cauterization may be an option when other methods have failed or are ineffective. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature of this treatment and its intended purpose.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize (the affected area) around the joint of the foot, close to the evacuation point, using multiple cauterizations. This statement appears to provide specific guidance on carrying out cauterization as a treatment for gout or other types of joint pain in the feet. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The olive oil cautery should be shaped as follows: This statement appears to describe the specific form or shape that a certain tool used in the treatment of gout or other joint conditions should take, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. This statement appears to provide guidance on carrying out a specific action during the treatment of gout or other joint conditions in the feet, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads into the toes or other joints, and this happens frequently, you should cauterize (the affected area) over each toe with three or four cauterizations using the olive oil cautery over the entire affected area. This statement appears to provide guidance on managing or treating the spread of gout or other types of joint pain in the feet, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you find that multiple cauterizations are necessary for this treatment, you should cauterize (the affected area) and avoid pressing too hard with the cautery beforehand, only surround the wound with the cautery. This statement appears to provide guidance on performing cauterization during the treatment of gout or other joint conditions in the feet, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain spreads into the toes and the foot, you should administer the cautery as previously described in its corresponding chapter. This statement appears to provide guidance on managing or treating the spread of gout or other types of joint pain in the feet, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the toes and it's called sugar, you should make a point at the base of the nail (cuticle) rotating around it as needed, making points along those two lines. This statement appears to provide guidance on treating or managing gout or other types of joint pain in the toes, but without more context, it's difficult to determine the exact nature and purpose of this treatment.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in the toes, then make a point on the circumference of each toe and on the nail of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain persists for several days in the toes or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not remove the patient from good care and medication regimen, for if good care is provided and this cauterization is performed, he will be healed (God help him).
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture is found in the groin and intestines are brought forward towards the genitalia, as it begins to heal, you must command the patient to fast on his own day and use gentle remedies for the fissure that has formed in his abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hand on his back, and command him to keep his own excrement contained until it is either expelled or the intestine or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return to the place where the fissure is and try to close it over the pelvic bone, using your hand to indicate the circular area at the upper parts of the divided body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cauterization instrument that has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is hot and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then you place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery in position, and you insert the tool into the hollow of the patella towards the middle of the thigh; and repeat the process if you did not succeed in entering the bone during the first observation.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the intestine during the time of your cauterization, to ensure that you do not burn the intestine and thus cause death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you do not touch the bone with the cautery, your operation is in vain.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cauterizing instrument for children should be fine and small according to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Care for the area of the cauterization for three days with a border until the scar from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Also care for that [area] with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to pause the food intake of the patient according to the length of their healing time, and that the intestine does not come out under the strain of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time to lift the patient after forty days, first administer the medicine carefully, and keep them for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and from violent speech, for if he follows this regimen of healing completely he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will explain the healing of ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and at the beginning, if possible, without pause, you should cauterize the rupture with a circular cautery according to its size, and it must be cauterized as the third part is done; and then care for that [area] with what has been said before, and do not neglect it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	It was first said by some that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, as it is called "the tent" [method]:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is placed perpendicular to the length on one side of the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand with a sharp pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and more effective.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-six.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twisting (torsion).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	If pain occurs in one of the limbs by accident or blow and persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be of the appropriate size and quality for each member, considering their magnitude and smallness, virtue and power, location of twisting or pain in that member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it heals with the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization on it; because it is common for such pains to spread from one member to another adjacent member, so you must try to reach those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy cases can be treated with cauterization as a great benefit, and mostly if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, if you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and can be cured with what has been said in the division [of leprosy] without spreading or not, and fear that corruption may spread throughout the patient's body and affect all of their complexion, then cauterize it on the head with two cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, and the second below it, extend the front to the end of the hair; and both above two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, hold the cautery a little way from the bone until a small indentation is made, and then scars are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize over the moles as prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauterizations that have been mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations over both temples, and two cauterizations over two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauterizations over the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the heels, and one on each heel, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the wrists, and one on each wrist, and two on the knees, and two on the thighs, and two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over each talon of their feet, and over the phalanges of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the talus [bone].
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some observations are cauterized on the bones of the pelvis with a cautery, and some on the mouth of the stomach, and others on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know that the more cauterizations you apply, the more beneficial and helpful it is; know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do not feel it when heated water is applied to them, because the body of the patient has already been stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	The cauterizations should be large or small according to the members and joints, depending on the pre-application of the spices of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply the cautery with flour of earth mixed with honey and the other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor (stupor means stupor or coma in this context).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member becomes stationary or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that member as it deserves according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let your cautery penetrate into the flesh a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Place it (the cauterization) on the tongue until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, the coma (stupor) of the head or feet, and the spine of the back is cauterized, and the symptoms of the nerves that affect that member are removed, and the coma is cured.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume this unless he who knows the anatomy of members and the exit points of nerves throughout the whole body is present.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of cancerous growths (albaras means "cancerous growth" in this context).
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When you perceive it is old and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you cauterize over it with a hot cautery for a short while according to the size of the lesion until the whiteness and the color recede and the color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that ulcer with peas and lentils boiled in rose oil and arnica leaves, and with pigeon's blood or yolk of an egg, each part separately and all mixed together, then cover it with a cloth and let it be until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Section .1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Scabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that with a circular hot cautery in the area around it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; however, I do not agree because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more appropriate that it should be cauterized around it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Title .1
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Treatise on the cauterization of gout.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an ulceration is delayed in ripening, either due to excessive moisture or the patient's condition being weak and elderly with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to speed up the ripening of the ulceration; then cauterize around it with a small number of cauteries punctured in a circle; and apply leeches to that which will hasten its ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform perforation with a cautery, hold the cautery in the appropriate location of the ulceration and wait until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the cautery is in a lower location to alleviate the body, hold it there until the area heals.
Capitol .lii.	Title .12
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Treatise on the cauterization of corrosive sores.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive sore is rot in the body, which consumes it like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see a corrosive sore in an area where cauterization with fire is appropriate, hold the cautery with large and few nails as necessary in the location of the rot.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And completely cauterize that area until you eradicate all the rot and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Apply leeches to that area for three days, and place it on the cauterized areas soaked in oil mixed until all scars are eradicated and all the rot is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Treat carefully that flesh producing pus.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh is born healthy for three days without corruption, that's good; otherwise, you must apply a hot iron to what is rotten in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive medicine is used sometimes with sharp medication because it is halfway between a hot iron.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cauterization with fire is only slightly beneficial for pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medication in the previous section, and so take that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	\[No direct translation is needed for this line as it simply indicates a new chapter.\]
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of nails and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motas often occur on the sides of the foot in a disease called clawfoot, which is large and deep-rooted, surrounding the foot; and cauterization in these cases can be done in two ways, namely cauterization with fire or cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with fire is the one that ignites a concave-shaped cautery similar to a bird's beak, which should be made of iron in accordance with the size of the clawfoot on all sides, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Place your hand on the burning cautery over the clawfoot, and move your hand around the clawfoot with the cautery until it reaches the depth of the clawfoot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until pus begins to flow.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Cover the area with a plaster made of bad herbs crushed with salt, and leave it on for a night, as this will remove the root of the problem.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Treat the affected area with general flesh-producing medication until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not heal, and motes continue to develop on the surface of the body, especially on the back and feet, you must administer cauterization with hot water in these cases; take a cup made of glass or iron or a bird's beak, and place it on the clawfoot; then pour a small amount of hot water into the cup, hold your hand over it, and rotate the cup around the clawfoot with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing against the edge of the cup at the root of the clawfoot, allowing the hot water to flow into the root of the claw; wait for an hour for the patient to feel the heat of the hot water on the affected area, and then remove it, as the clawfoot with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this to all such cases until they are healed completely.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Treat the pus that arises when the roots of the claws are eradicated with general flesh-producing medication.
Capitol .liiii.	\[No direct translation is needed for this line as it simply indicates a new chapter.\]
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When tremors arise due to irritation of a nerve or fever caused by irritation, or for any other similar reason, you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or with five on the spinal bones, between each spinal bone there should be one cautery; and on the limbs and stomach, use olive oil as a cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor will subside, and the healing of the illness caused by irritation will hasten.
Capitol .lv.	\[No direct translation is needed for this line as it simply indicates a new chapter.\]
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of sudden hernias in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body has a hernia and produces pus-filled holes made of corrupted materials, at the onset it is necessary to cauterize the entire length of the fistula with a thin, pointed cautery infused with myrtle oil that is then ignited; or with a long lancet from erestology; or with a slow cauterizer.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And at certain intervals, the cauterization is performed at the start of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not believed, and the redundancy is destroyed by performing it, and it heals from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it should be done with appropriate evacuation through leeching.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flux due to sudden wound by incision of an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	At certain intervals (after the arrow wound has been incised), the flux of blood is stopped by pressing down on the wound itself, or by the incision of an abscess or cauterization of the member, and in such a case, it often remains difficult to heal.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, whenever it happens (to stop the blood flux due to an arrow wound), you should press your thumb on the opening of the arrow, and wait for a certain number of intervals until the bleeding stops by itself, and does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then wait for the olive oil cauterizers (cautery sticks) to become hot and burn slightly, by counting a certain number of breaths, and blow on them until they are heated enough.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of the small or large pieces and place it on the location and wound where the artery has been broken, pressing firmly over it until the bleeding has stopped, and then cauterize it before the vessel has become narrowed and constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you press it and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery from among those that have been prepared in the fire, and continue to perform this procedure until the blood has been constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and let another person approach the patient with evil intentions.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in such cases, and even more so if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: by cauterization as described above, or by extraction without cutting off (the extremities), since when the extremities are burned, the blood is constricted; or by binding it with a ligature or bandage for strong compression, or by placing medications over it that have the property of constraining the blood; and they should be strengthened with pillows and tight bandages.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But one who administers proper compression with a bandage or by placing hot substances and similar causes should not be trusted.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone who is not the doctor or has no medicine, then apply pressure to the wound on the opening of that vein as described above, and understand the great compression until the blood has stopped flowing from the superior part of the wound, and do not press on the arrow; and over the arrow, sprinkle it with cold water of great refrigeration until the blood is congealed and thickened; and in cases where cauterization or medication is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision, perforation, wounds, abscesses, and similar things.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	As we have said in the first capital, all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and medication that burns are indicated, as well as their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them, along with the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we shall proceed in this capital according to that method, so that the one who desires it may be relieved, therefore do what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this (new subject), son, remember that in this capital is explained what has been mentioned in the first capital of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be extremely careful, since in the operation that will be described in this capital there are many evacuations that involve blood, from which life depends, therefore the vein must be cleansed or an incision made on the abscess or the opening of the wound or purification of the sore or extraction of a thorn or incision of stone and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all these (procedures) should come fear, trembling, and in the worst case, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you to be very careful not to let this happen (to yourself), since sometimes you must behave like healthy people in the treatment of various diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there are some who will die from their own disease, and you must be vigilant because of the severity of their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and fear that illness which is a sign of death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those who give you their possessions and call on you for help, hope for your health; but their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore you should not agree to this (treatment), and your caution should be greater than greed and rapacity; do not presume any cause without certain knowledge that confirms it, and to which the patient can give his consent.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use the prognosis and indication of each of your patients (for treatment), since in this case you have help with acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not lead nor protect you, for that is within His power.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And this chapter is divided according to the previous one concerning cauteries, regarding the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of the matter and the need for which you inquire.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this illness, observed in children, occurs during childbirth and when the mother squeezes the child's head with excessive force.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Sometimes it is caused by a hidden condition which is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this disease except in children; and as for all those whom I see, it seems to me that they are destined for death, and thus it appears to me that the work is in vain in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head was so swollen inside that he could not stop growing due to the size of his head, and moreover, the moisture increased until he died from burns.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this water either accumulates between the skull and the bone or collects beneath the bones around the fontanelle.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case is when the water accumulates between the skull and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a slit along the length, and the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width until the water runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the water is more greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the water is beneath the bones, it is indicated that you see the corners of the head opened on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the corners inside and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Extract all the water; close the incisions with gauze and feathers; bind it up above with oil and bandages for five days, remove the linen and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, keep the head straight and immobilize it; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Another method of incision considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is greater in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the left side; and therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and perform it as is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be aware that do not incise the artery and allow blood flow, as the patient will die from the flow of blood with drainage of water.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries, which are appropriately called auricles, named hilasisses.
Capitol segon.	Third Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an ulcer or tumor occurs on the eyelids or foot, and it is old and does not respond to medication, then the final treatment in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, when you want to incise those arteries of the patient's head, first clean the location with rough fabric to reveal the arteries, and keep the neck of the patient straight with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on each side on the locations that are appropriate for the auricles, and they will only appear in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And use a probe on the artery and incise each one with a sharp spatula pointed towards the bone, and let that be for the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the spatula next to the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	The length of the incision should be adjusted to two fingers' width, for when any vein is incised, blood will be expelled with pulsatile escape, which may jump out frequently due to its pulsation.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the joint, you must measure the space of three fingers from the elbow and press down with your thumb into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the quantity of blood that should be let out is about a cup full (unc.). And it is not necessary to let out more or less than this, and all of this depends on the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of the artery in their leg.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then examine the wound and, if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, cut it out to prevent the formation of an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the wound with feathers and linen cloth, and care for it with salve until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or new ulcer appears on the temples due to acidity and humidity in the folds of the temples, or when it is an old one that is vehement and similar to those, and it has been treated with the methods of medical care but does not improve, we have therefore turned our attention to these diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of operation and extraction of these vessels is to shave the hairs which are on the temples; and understand that the artery appearing in the temple is indicated by its pulse, which is revealed by its pulsation, but it is hidden except in a few people due to weakness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, you must hold the patient's head with some cloth; and press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the probe with this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you score the skin with the probe until you reach the artery; and then make an incision in that place and extract it at the upper edge, extracting it from the sheath and uncovering the layers underneath.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, you must wrap it with the tip of the scalpel, and then make a small incision at that place according to the length of its extremities and compression, and do not allow blood flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not come out from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate about a cup of blood. up to three times (if necessary).
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with strong silk thread or cord, and do not allow decay before the wound heals and avoid blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut off any excess tissue between the linen cloths, doing so at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery directly into the bone with a cautery cutler until the edges are incised, and remain in the location of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better if the patient has a fever or is in a hot and humid environment; for cautionery is of those causes that help to stop humidity, so it is better in this case as well.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to carry out the extraction of arteries in a clean and secure place, and they should be kept covered with appropriate powder, and treated with dry medications that cause the flesh to dry up and heal with cold water until it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during another visit blood flow occurs from the artery while you are working, you must then take steps to stop the bleeding, either with cautery or by covering the location, and press your hand on it until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of this does not present itself to you, you must then cover the location with your thumb until the bleeding is coagulated, and plug the area with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and press firmly as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And one thing that is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have pressed down on both ends, then releasing them, until they reach the bone and incise the vein at two points, so that the length between its extremities can be elongated, for it is not consolidated in all places with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And here is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The distance between the two blades should be even.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the gap between the two blades is less than even, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two close blades, they will not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some roughness in them, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh should be cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better in all operations and easier as well.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	The space between the two blades should be the size of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the care of lungs with acute and acidic tears of the kidneys.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and those veins are located on the top of the head and do not contribute to any cause of medical treatment, and at times the patient's face turns red and they feel tingling in their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the holes of those become stretched out, moistened so much that their skin is known, and their eyelashes are scalded by the acidity of the tears, ancient remedies were used in treating these with this operation, and I name this treatment as spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	It means: And you command the patient to raise their eyebrows which are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead, equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the incision is two fingers: The first incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes which are near the lacrimal duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep away from the incision of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge soaked with vinegar or dry cloth, apply it to the wound and extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Place a spatula with two sharp ends on this incision, whose shape is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the partition of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape with it completely the cartilage that is between two incisions and apply it to the middle incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And place this spatula and enter it again into the first incision using another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the sides of that sharp scalpel, separate the attached tissue from the cartilage, and cut through the cartilage to reach the midline, and divide all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure the incision continues as far as the cartilage appears, and apply it to the midline up until the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And let the bleeding subside before squeezing the clots of blood with cloth.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pause in each incision for a suitable length of time, and place on top of the powder that has been steeped in vinegar, oil, and sour milk, making sure it does not form an infected cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the linen and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and apply it with a basilica paste mixed with rose oil and other things until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of tears due to catharsis and the eyes descending from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is sharp and continuing catharsis, and at times the eyes of the patient are stretched out slightly, and their look is debilitated, and the eyelids have ulcers and the eyelashes fall out, and in the forehead there is a severe pain that extends, it means by these events that the matter and catharsis do not come from any other veins except those within the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to raise their forehead, and make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, small in length (and it starts from the left temple to the right temple; it should go through the bone; extend your hand away from the eyelashes which are painful due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Squeeze out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill between the lips of the incision with cotton wool or dry linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And apply on top of it powder steeped in vinegar and oil to prevent the formation of an infected cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove it and see that the abscess has diminished, it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where there is no longer flesh, and apply it with a drying treatment, as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mixed them together, and made an ointment out of it and administered it on those sores near the skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the care for what catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that catch in the ears are of four types: either it is a mineral stone or similar to one, such as iron and glass, or it is from a plant, such as wax or beans, or it is fluid, such as water and honey and their likes, or an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when a stone or another similar cause that does not fit or grow in the ear occurs, and the ear is blocked, expose the ear to sunlight. If you see the stone, then distill it with some volatile oil or sizam, and administer its extraction. Then make the patient sneeze with certain conditions, and close the nose with a cloth so that the sneezing event occurs.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some small pieces of fabric or wool on the circuit of the ear and extend the ear at its openings, as these causes are often forgotten with this method.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not resolved, administer the extraction using the instrument called a gynecological spatula, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If the stone is forgotten with the gynecological spatula, that's fine; if not, administer the extraction with a thin probe of minimal doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if the stone is not forgotten with this method, make a tube of steel and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and close its surroundings with wax and softened oil to prevent it from being opened except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And pull out the air with strong attraction, as many times as you have recognized it.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If the stone is not forgotten with this method, take some alum or vinegar prepared with which birds are pressed a small quantity and place it on the end of the ray, then cover that area well with a suitable cloth.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert it into the ear canal with ease and excise the ear with moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if the stone is not forgotten with all the methods you have recognized, then take care to cut off what grows in the form of an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting off what grows is that you first puncture the patient's saphenous vein and extract blood in accordance with its virtue, then place the wax between your hands and turn the ear to the openings, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, pushing out the pus from the area most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Let the fissure be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and if the stone is protruded, remove it with appropriate instruments; then stitch up the fissure at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause that falls into the ear is one of the fats that grows and swells, administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your intention, then take thin tweezers in the following form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the abscission of that fat which fell into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that the fat is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place it on various pieces, then extract it with tweezers or a gynecological spatula, or abscision as described earlier, as the extraction is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But if water enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with certain conditions at the beginning, and fill their ear with some old substance, and rub over the ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten by this method, that's fine; otherwise, take many small tweezers and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them up slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into their ear canal and sneeze on one side of that part, then strike another pebble against the pebble that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water is forgotten (removed).
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been removed, take paper or gauze. and dip the one end of it into the ear canal, then extend the other end into the fire until it is burned off.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And take another piece of gauze and do this several times until all the water is removed, and strain it with a canal as described earlier for removing stones.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is a small one and similar in appearance, treat it as mentioned in the division; but if it is a large one that causes swelling at the opening, then administer the extraction with caution and skill, and it is easier to handle than all other causes found in the wound.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm born in the wound, when you treat it as mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not consider your cure, then you must be cautious to observe the wound on the soles.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it gently or subtly, but if no cause is found, then take a thin and wide syringe in the form of this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the thin end of the syringe into the wound according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and suck it out with strong suction, and do this repeatedly, until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient does not improve with treatment, then you close and seal the circuit of the syringe with wax as mentioned; then administer distillations that have been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and observe the effect in the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion with which you infuse the medicinal oils into the wound using this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, thin in width, with a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, make it as they push to keep the syringe in the concavity of the container here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and cover its end with cotton appropriately, then pour oil or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you choose, into the depression of the instrument – which is inside the wound –, then insert the rod with a suitable amount of pressure and squeeze it until the oil is expelled in the depression of the instrument and the patient feels the oil within.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is to be infused into the wound should already be slightly heated with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And ensure that the cause to be distilled in the wound is not too hot, as medicines for wounds do not tolerate such heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of abscesses in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some infants' bellies that have not been perforated develop abscesses, and this happens in some men as well; an abscess in the meat of the intestine due to a wound or rotten flesh in that area; sometimes this abscess is formed near the site of the hernia that does not heal, and at other times it is located outside the incision.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	The abscess that occurs near the site of a hernia that does not heal is in the greater dispositions for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In the abscess where healing is achieved, it is necessary to have the patient open the hernia on the sole and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if an abscess appears to have healed, open it with a thin spatula, whose form is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity in which it is small in width, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is two lion's paws wide so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the opening is for flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you shall take a sharp and pointed instrument and make an incision with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opening is in the front of the ear, take a thin iron rod and heat it slightly, and then place it in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if there is an opening with something that the patient experiences relief from, due to the pressure being relieved, force the opening further with ease, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place a linen cloth on the ear according to the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound, or take some other substance and immerse it in water and grind it into powder and use it as a compress on the wound, and if you see the ear already healed, then you must remove the substance and replace it with another that you will wrap in wax that is made with rose oil until the cauterized ulcer gives way; and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	However, if there is bleeding, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment for inflammation that affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Inflammations of the eyelids, which sometimes occur with swelling, are sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have them held or tied and incise them with a spatula of their roots, and place compresses on the areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	However, if pain accompanied by bleeding occurs, you shall cauterize them with a thin lid-cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when incisions and swellings return when there remains any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that affects the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings that occur in the eyelids of humans due to a cause similar to swelling in its strength and duration are called by this name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation is that you consider whether the swelling comes from something that appears on the eyelid and affects it all around; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the width of it, and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and suspend it with a ligature and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if the incision is not prepared and you cannot penetrate the eyelid with an incision, then do not perform this operation for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, you shall adjust it with sutures; and treat it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm for that because the blood of it will restore and fleshes over.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining into the parts within the eyelid, you should remove the surface inside the eyelid, drain the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a ligature, which you do not need to incise, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by an incision, then do not perform this operation for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And before the incision, wash the hands with salt water; and treat the area with whatever causes it to heal until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment for excision in the upper eyelid of humans.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is a growth that arises in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and it is more common among children, aggravating their eyes and causing them great pain; and they cannot endure the light of the sun because tears flow towards them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you sometimes see them on their faces all the time, and on their faces when they sleep; and sweat is present on their lower eyelashes, which has already been inflamed, and the imminence of adhesion appears in the eyelid; and that when you press the area with your fingers, you feel it adhere to them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of operation is in that the patient places his head on your lap and places a cloth and something warm over it, and make a circle according to the size that contains arsenic from all sides, and place it on top of it and press with your fingers all around so that adhesion is formed in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatula, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in flap surgery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in the opening, it is important that you cut open the abdomen completely up to the navel, because in many cases hernias may be found in the abdomen through a rupture, according to the form of a white growth.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, you should remove those with clothes that you have wrapped around the abdomen between your hands in front and turn it over with your right and left hand until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Make sure not to touch the tear, so that you do not cause the sponge to enter the wound and contaminate it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If an artery does not appear in the beginning of the tear, then you should touch the tear with a small cloth for processing the hernia; and take it out as previously said, and immerse it in water and vinegar, and place it on top of the area and squeeze it tightly with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Then, let those who crush salt squeeze that in the concavity of the tear so that it removes the remaining moisture from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized spot, then care for that with a plaster made of cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capital .xi. (This is the end of the text. It seems to be a medical treatise about surgical procedures, such as treating hernias and cauterizing wounds.)
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the ways of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of a wound there are swellings due to the pressure of the natural hairs and old age, then we must touch the wound and make ways for maladies such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and cloth over it until that is the cause of the destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and cure it in four ways: or by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or by touching through incision and suturing; or by cannula as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore it is necessary that you hold the patient's head in your hands; turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, if it has turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into the one on which the lid separates from the lower part, then pass the needle through faithfully, and it should be - near the margin of the eyelid where no hairs grow - close to the skin, and pull the thread above the eyelid and turn that one towards the eye.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision at the corner of the eyelid below the hairs aligned with the lacrimal groove and pass the spatula into the smaller lacrimal duct; then extract the thread and place a powder or fabric piece under the palpebra, and hold it open with tweezers, and it should be like a fig leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape should be according to the degree of eyelid swelling, because this varies among men, as some require a large incision according to the degree by which the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural fissure like the thickness of a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the uncus in one of the two angles of the conjunctiva, and remove it completely; then adjust the scissors to cut both labia and gula or thin thread, clean the blood, and let any excess thread adhere over the eyebrows for some reasons sticking, if you want to do this, otherwise do not care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And keep the stitching of the thread inside for three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound without stitching, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid should be elevated due to the healing of the wound and its aggregation; however, stitching is better, and therefore according to the ancients, this is recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in any case, it should be applied to the patient, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in treating is to place a piece of myrtle leaf over the eyelid in this manner: then lift the eyelid with three separate and grouped uncus in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, use the uncus; and when you cannot do this, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, then enter another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller one, adjust them equally between your fingers, and with these raise your hand with the lift described earlier, raise the entire conjunctiva over which the mark was made as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both lips of the wound with stitching and care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs in your incision or wound, treat it with caustic and similar substances, and with gentle washing.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelashes turn inside, then you should use what we have said for incision; but stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To drain with reed is like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside as I have described; then prepare two reeds or two thin stilts whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made an incision at the corners of each partition, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Place a thin layer of the lower eyelid tissue under each partition with great care and tighten the reeds of each partition with strong tension, leave that for several days, because the conjunctiva will die from the tension and become detached and will eventually fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, break it with tweezers, and care for the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is consolidated, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not touch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two reeds that you will make in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the width and length neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On lifting of hairs touching the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When non-natural, hard, sharp and irritating hairs touch the eyelid, the operation is that you take a thin needle and adjust it with soft thread and leather; then carefully align its extremities without moving too much.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be equal to that of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then draw another thin field beside it in brief and use its ends as you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place the patient's head on your lap and let it be close to you so that your work is visible, for it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into the appropriate spot on the shaved area with care, ensuring it enters the eyelid quickly but not too deeply until you extract it naturally through the skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull out the hair and insert it into the mixture, but let there be only one or two hairs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Place your hand on it until the hair is removed from the eyelid and mix it with the solution naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the mixture is not removed from the eyelid and the hair is not extracted, you should apply the mixture to the incisions around it, using the field that you have prepared with it, until the mixture is removed from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Watch it with your eyes, for you will remove the mixture and the field, and grind each of them thoroughly, and leave the ground up for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it well on good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is short, then you should adjust a long hair from natural hairs and lift it with that, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment for exorcising the condition called ehacratir in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ehacratir appears in the eyelid and is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts on either right or left side due to poor consolidation from plague, injury or cauterization, it is known as leporina, and it can be natural or accidental. It is caused by consolidation from plague, injury or cauterization, or something similar in nature, resulting in poor healing.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The procedure for the operation is to cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, placing a piece of cloth there until they are healed and tied together.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	It is also necessary to use healing methods for the causes that cause it, as returning ehacratir in a worse state than before will not have a favorable outcome.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case causes that soften it such as fenugreek, and wrap it with the water in which it is boiled, or dyeuquilon ointment, which is liquefied with oil, and immerse the cloth in it and heal it with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret of your healing is that you perforate everything carefully that was not previously consolidated in the manner described at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of ehacratir that does not return the shape of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment for ehacratir that occurs in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacratir that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is actually called ehacratir; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental ehacratir is caused by plague or injury or cauterization, or something similar.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operation for this is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin around it with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and incise it deeply with a large spoon.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Therefore, if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take the ray and place it in the fractured figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two slits in the lateral part of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at two corners of the incision that meet and make a right angle where they converge, so that when they come together, the figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is the Greek letter lambda (λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Push the flesh aside to the extent of the length of the sharp blade from it, so that the eyelid is visible.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Push the parts apart and stitch them with thread, care for them with what we call softening medicines and warm baths until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the eye is to be closed by suture or cauterization, you must make a clean cut across the eyelid as instructed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Push apart the warmth between the lips as previously instructed.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, in the sermon on the treatment of eye closure when it is above or below, you must perform the operation according to its preparation, and that is in the form of a diverse cluster.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skillful artist always prepares the device in every possible way that is within his reach until he restores the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to what is necessary for the operation and the tools in the best arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men who are completely adhered to the eyelid above the tear duct and prevented from moving freely and performing its natural functions, you must intervene at the edge of the ray below the eyelid, raise it or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp like a knife, since the patient is anxious about the operation. Remove the spatula without damaging the eye or its surrounding area.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Make your incision in such a way that the adhesion is removed with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and healing the entire adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you put saltwater in the eye to wash it, or distill it in a saucepan with water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Separate the space between the eyelid and the eye with warm water, then place a woolen pad soaked in oil on the eye, and apply a third-day treatment of consolidating agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of the nail and removal of skin from the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail can be in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard, thin cipher; or it is non-nervous, resembling congealed white moisture, which when touched, or squeezed, it separates easily and the oil is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both cases, they do not begin until the large tear duct is covered, gradually moving towards the vision and preventing light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of working in the incision is that the patient lowers their head towards yours and opens their eyes, you raise the eyelid with your hand, collect the nail with oil-soaked tweezers and stretch it to the edges above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And you take a needle and insert it into the root of a horse's or cow's or goat's hair, or something similar, or thick, double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, and remove the nail; stretch it to the edges above, and cut off the root of the hair that is near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And you follow this by the hair towards the end of the procedure.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you incise the root of the tear duct along its length with a fine spatula or small scissors, and cut away the natural tissue of the tear duct to prevent continuous flow of tears during the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Sometimes the nail with only oil or fat is extended as previously mentioned, and it should be cauterized with lion's wool, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Be aware that the spatula should not touch the corneal membrane and should cause a break in it, and the pupil should be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the eye with a small amount of salt water or thyme oil, and let it heal by itself within a day; care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or oil into it, let this type of nail be cured with medicines, and healed in this way as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise it, you open the eye of the patient and take a fine lion's wool spatula with sharp edges as follows:
am subtilitat.	In thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If the moisture is thickened and congested in the cavity, you distill water from your boiling pot of thyme oil or rose oil or saltwater into the eye, and let it rest for a day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And you repeat the operation until all that is present in it has disappeared, unless a counter-abscess appears in the eye, in which case you remove it, and care for the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Approach your operation repeatedly until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed by a strong odor, should be suspended with oil; and cut that out from one side, and do not deepen the incision so as not to cause the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the lacrimal eye root and apply sinapi seed until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of anal abscess and that which is born of skin adhered to the anus.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases, in the anus there is born red flesh, which is overgrown and covers the pupil or approaches and presses on the eyelids, strongly compressing them at the edges and resembling a rose of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation on it is that the patient holds his head; and open the anus, collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, and take it out with forceps or a cage; and begin to incise the flesh from the beginning until it is finished with scissors, and be careful not to damage the anus during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision may be with which you incise that or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps according to the shape of it that comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, fill the anus with salt ash, or distill in it red powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place over the anus, covered with alum powder until it is assured of cauterizing the abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of anal abscess and the cauterized wound is not healed, and you fear the cauterizing of the abscess, release the anus and treat that abscess with what will soften it, and then repeat the operation over it until it is healed, and similarly do in the skin adhered to the anus of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful to avoid all cure of the anus by natural means or accidental means, work with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently prepared for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the anus.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is reddish-colored and hard on the anus and forbids the clothing its operation, and loosen the anus with warm water for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning it is necessary that you consider if the anus in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other disease than pus, then collect the pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to hold his head on your lap, and suspend those veins with oil or two according to your discretion; and that oil should be of double refinement in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two oils gradually in one container according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins are collected with fine forceps, finely, and the blood is drained gradually until you see those veins be removed from the anus and swollen.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the anus at the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day, be firm in your operation that you do not incise anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill in the anus head green or red powder to burn what remains of the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you fill it all with what relieves the pain of it, and release it for several days until the pain is subsided and the abscess is assured of cauterizing.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on it according to what the matter requires until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of arisatum to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisatum with cautery or acute medicine burning as described earlier and it is not healed, do not be deceived in it but make a slit on the mature abscess, extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone appears.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is visible and sometimes corruption or blackness is observed in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called sharp head, and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round like a nail that is pierced through with a point of lime or alum powder (as shown in the following shape):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place it on the corrupt part of the bone, and turn it between your fingers, pressing your small hand gradually until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done for some time, and then restore the area with drying and stiffening causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh grows there and the body separates from the wound and remains for forty days without being renewed or drained and no accident occurs in the area, then you know it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not an abscess but rather a wound that needs to be reduced to the shape of the nose, and you do so using this method: first, you uncover it with a sharp instrument or medicine, once the bone is exposed, then you take three pieces of linen as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Make the handle of the instrument triangular, and its shaft extended to the end in this way as sometimes done.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place the splint on the bone (the one that is near the tear duct), and hold it with a little of your thumb, and then bend your hand around the linen until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient feels it when you press down on their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you restore the area with styptic medications drying as advised.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and area harden, the material that comes out from the wound returns to the nose, thus it is less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling in the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel swells completely and no harm or decrease occurs, you must loosen the patient, support their head, and place compresses on the neck without incision and using good suction; then place liniment on the heel made of aloe, camphor, myrrh, and colocynth, and apply a strong plaster on the heel with much powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for preparing the powders is to take lions' wool in pieces, and each piece should be doubled four times; then grind them into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place the required amount of powder on one over the other according to the size of the swelling that is needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then strengthen the powdered mixture with tough, strong material and tightly bound cloth; repeat the compresses without incision using good suction; leave the compresses on the swelling for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the ligament becomes soft, it must be made tighter.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Leave the ligament as previously described for the day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already been reduced (that is good), but if not, then continue to apply the plaster with powders and tight binding and compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the protrusion of the tunica uvea (eye membrane).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the tunica uvea (eye membrane) and it protrudes out of the eyelid like a grain of sand, you should shape it like a human head for easier incision. If you wish to perform the operation, do so as follows: insert the needle into the white part of the eye at the lower side, and then place another needle with double thread from the tear duct side, making the two needles intersect; pull out the first needle according to its position; and then incise the site where the two needles meet and remove the protruding part of the eye membrane around the intersection of the needle. Strengthen this area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on a woolen linen soaked in egg white, allowing the thread to pass through the yolk.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for the wound with whatever helps it heal until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	At certain times, surround the entire area with a circle of cloth around the swollen area and pierce it with a thin spatula at the center of the swelling, allowing the white substance to drain and reduce the swelling as quickly as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Approach strong within so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Chapter on treating hernias.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called alconati is not simply water that descends but something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working on it is to make the patient lie down straight on a bed with the affected side exposed, and then grab his head with both hands and push it toward the opposite side to make the water stay in place and not descend, keep the lumen open, and let the patient see the causes as he used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent to health is not prepared with what has been said, then make the patient lie down on his back, take a thin spatula and place it on the navel, following the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea toward the crown (into the desired location), until the intestine is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then you distill in the hot water vapor the infusion that you have mixed with honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And heal the other causes until it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital, Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of descending water from the sweat.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	I have already said about the types of water in division and which is suitable for piercing with the serum explaining it, then perform that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on his back on a bed and raise his feet slightly, tying them with a string.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand close to the eyelid of the patient's right eye if the water is on the right side, or with your left hand if it is on the left.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take almonds with your right hand if it is on the left side, or with your left hand if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the almond near the crown by the thickness of the nail in the albumen of the eye on the side of the lesser lacrimal, and grind the almond with virtue and roll it with your hand towards that side.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And pierce the eggwhite of the eye and feel that the almond has reached its goal due to the purpose.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	It is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the prick be equal to the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with the pupil the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the almond into the location where the water is and then you thrust it down slightly towards another place, and if the water descends immediately, then quickly make the patient cover his eyes and put the almond in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a short time; if the water descends, then you rest after that moment when the almond is not dropped.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the almond easily and grind it slightly with your hand, and dissolve a little clear salt in the water and wash the eye inside; and outside the eye, place or stop or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and bind it with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we of our time do not practice that treatment with an egg white mixture.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If your almond is not hard enough to enter the eye due to its toughness (since there are some people whose eyes are very tough), then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alder, of which this is the shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce that conjunctiva, and do not damage your hand in the process, and do not force it to go via almond's location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And introduce the almond as we said before.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You should complete the work, prepare a bed for the patient with a descending position in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and prohibit all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Rest in the nature of that which we have said for his nature to remain steady, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let him eat as his condition permits for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And release him in that dark place and open his eyes, show him some causes, and return the food to him on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	You should not do this in the healing hour or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It has been said that you must avoid doing it because water can easily pass due to great and violent looking.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs, it is necessary that you release the eye after seven days and correct it with what dissolves the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	You absorb the eye and rest on the patient's face so that it is regulated for a few days, existing in the most dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually reduce it from that darkness and convert it to its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in the school, a student is not excused from vision for several days, and if you are daring about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has now come to us from one of those who is called Artax, and another said that he made a fire with alder wood pierced by water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen it performed in our land by anyone who has perfected it, nor is it written about it in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the shapes of the almond types, which are to be used on those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or steel properly, and their ends have this subtle, triangular shape, with an acute end as its form.
Capitol .xxiv.	It seems like the text you've provided is from a medical treatise, possibly discussing various procedures related to surgery and medicine during medieval times. The lines I translated describe how gout (podagra) is identified, and the recommended treatment for foot pain caused by it. Additionally, the text mentions a procedure for reducing an intestinal hernia, as well as the preparation of a patient for surgery, including positioning and support from assistants. The line starting with "E sian faytas de eram o de ferr" seems to be referring to tools made of iron or steel that have a specific shape. It's fascinating to see how medical practices have evolved over time!
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Do not cauterize the nose in the treatment of flesh.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various kinds of flesh grow in the nose that resemble the sting of a scorpion or the feeler of a polyps, this disease is called "polyps," which is similar to the representation of such a polyp.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From it comes cancerous flesh, leprous, dark colored; and from it is the flesh of a lion not dark-colored.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion flesh, the patient must be made to sit exposed to the sun and have their nose opened, and make an incision where the flesh is found.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that from the forehead part and incise what you have previously understood of it with a sharp, subtle spatula between the parts where you know all the flesh has been separated; for if any cause remains that requires abscission, then you remove it with one of the subtle instruments until there is no further need.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However, if the abscess or boil becomes septic, you must wait for it to open; or if it is a malignant abscess, you cover and cauterize it until it is drained and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply some dressing near the incision in the nose, using vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	However, if the nose is open and humidity enters into the palate, you should know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	However, if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inside it is flesh neither pus nor bone of the nose to which no abscission has been performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must enter the faithful person's mouth, and press against the molars, and pause between each tooth the amount of the finger or thumb, and gently examine the patient and insert one end of the file into the nose with either a rod or another means possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after performing the action described above, you should draw its fragrance into it until it reaches the nasal canals and is excreted onto the patient's forehead, as children at school often do this action, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two ends of the file, one end protruding from the nose and the other remaining within the nose, and then apply a carving tool to the flesh on the teeth that are in the file, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the teeth of the file.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the file, and pause in the nose near the drainage of pus using a small cup or bowl, and do this for three days or more until the soreness subsides completely from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And in the end of the procedure, pause a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Uses it if the treatment dries up.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument for capping the purge maker, with which essential oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, similar to a small lantern opened like a small jug, and the neck should be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed canal like a pipe, and the nozzle of the capping purge maker should be flat, open; on which you can hold it when you draw out oil or water that you want from the juices and secretions.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This capping is precious: recipe of beaver castoreum, white birch bark, ginger, and piped saffron, long pepper, asafetida, epitheca of cumin anise. Mix with the juice of beetroot and cabbage, make pills, and prepare a pill with water boiled down, pour it into the nose of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the origins of teeth in the nasal cavities.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When a tooth emerges from the nasal cavity, it is magnified and extolled in some days until the tooth is loosened and falls out.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And since you should cut it off at the beginning of its appearance, dig it out completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Place your hand over the area or use cauterization or burning medicine in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the tooth's excision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; do not touch it with iron as it is a cancerous abscess, for the tooth that excises this abscess carries great danger to that person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is soft and not dark in color, and excision is possible, then evacuate the patient and excise it without fear, heal the area with a drying agent and keep it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by ulceration or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the continuity is dissolved in one of these cartilages, little confidence should be placed in this operation except in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So when you treat any of these causes, consider if it is a fresh ulcer with its own blood, and then sew the two lips of the ulcer together with sutures, and place a dressing on it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated and each is made healthy, you must cut each half of its chain as far as it bleeds.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Place the two lips together with sutures and strengthen them, then sprinkle dragon's blood powder over it and triturate it, and place a dressing of emplaustra diafinicon or any other consolidating plasters on top of the powder, leave it for two or three days, then remove the dressing and replace it with another plaster until the flesh heals by itself, and care for it with mouthwash until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as recommended in abdominal sutures, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of the causes that appear in both lips in the interior divisions.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	When the tooth emerges in the interior divisions of men's lips, some cancerous abscesses similar to pus-like matter appear, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and wounds of each abscess completely, fill the area with sagittarius powder until the blood is stopped, and wash it with vinegar and heal the area with astringent water until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the excision of the attached flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A growth often occurs on the attached flesh of the gums, which the ancients called albulus; therefore, you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and excise it as necessary, and allow the blood to flow or let it drain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place a dressing of sage powder or other astringent or healing powders on top.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, you must excise it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp scars appear on the surface of the teeth in the interior divisions, in the roots and between the gums, some are often darkened and become cavity or green until the gum is affected by this corruption and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore it is necessary for you to seize the patient between your hands and hold their head in your lap, pull out the teeth where the abscesses or causes similar to sand appear before any cause remains, and do this with the black and citrus-like substances (perhaps referring to some medicinal materials) until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If it is at the beginning of the reasoning, that's fine; otherwise, you must repeat the reasoning on other days and on the third day until it reaches the final statement that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth have a need for various kinds of resorbers with different shapes and forms according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so because the resorber used for removing the tooth from its socket is different from the one used to scrape between the teeth, these types of resorbers must be prepared which you will soon see:
Capitol .xxx.	Capital thirty.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	De eradicación de dientes.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you treat the tooth of its pain with all care and to take all precautions during the entire extraction process, because it is not a good thing for the remaining portion of the tooth to be exposed when it is extracted, as it contains sublime substance which is an exception in the extraction process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, when the patient needs to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain because many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract the wrong one and the pain does not stop until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have seen through barber surgery.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, you should make an incision around the tooth with spittle containing some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gum in its entirety, and then apply mau or fine forceps gradually until it is fully loosened.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply some ointment with strong holding forceps for good communication or structure, and hold the patient's head between your thick hands so that you have a good grip on it without causing discomfort, and carefully move the tooth in a manner that does not break it or cause the patient more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not forgotten, then you should take one of those instruments, and place it in the area with ease and effort for the removal of it as described at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, you must cover that fracture with cloth and compress it at the end of a thin rod to avoid cracking it during your compression with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must work carefully and make incisions in the entire circumference of the gum and use caution so as not to break it or leave a gaping hole in it, and then return over the patient to check if the pain is greater than the original pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their practice and arrogance during tooth extraction, because they don't administer the remedies that we have recommended; for many times they cause great swellings on men's faces which are difficult to treat, and all or some of the roots remain, or some bones of the jaw remain as we have seen testified by many cases.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the removal of it should be washed with water or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flow occurs through here, for example like a watched motion (I'm assuming you meant "observed motion", such as pulsation), then take some amount of vinegar and sprinkle it over the affected area, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers that are used at the beginning should be long in length, short in width and thick, to avoid being bent when they are used.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be as broad in the handle as necessary so that when it is tightened they are not bent, and be short in length.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian iron and straight in length, and on the ends of those there should be teeth that interlock with each other and tighten firmly by pressure from the sides, and sometimes the ends of those are shaped like a stork's beak (ciconia), which is called "guanta", and they have strong grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital XXXI. This is the number indicating which chapter or section of the text this passage belongs to in the treatise. It is important for organizing and reference purposes.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of broken bones from the jaws. This passage likely discusses a surgical procedure for treating injuries or diseases affecting the jaw, such as impacted teeth or fractured bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of a broken tooth is necessary due to some cause, then you must stop on that spot and wait for one or two days until it becomes softened; and then insert forceps or tweezers with tips shaped like a stork's beak (ciconia) or "guanta", the type of forceps mentioned earlier:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of these forceps should be made hollow like a file or an awl. This suggests that the hollow tips of the forceps can be used to scoop out pus or other debris from an abscess, or possibly drill small holes in bone during surgery.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not follow the instructions regarding these forceps or tweezers, then you must be cautious and carefully cut away all the tissue and insert an instrument called an "atali", which is a small lever with the following shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a short, thick handle, and not be bent so that it is not broken. This indicates that the atali lever should have a sturdy construction to withstand the force required during surgical procedures. A bent or broken lever could cause complications and make the surgery more difficult.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the incision is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are their shapes: The shape of the first instrument is that of a triangle with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument is shaped like a triangle with a thin point:
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	You are now assisted by this instrument, which has two arms shaped as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that I will describe for tooth extraction; because this instrument is also used, which resembles a large nail, and its shape is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the curved or short triangular tip with some thickness, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for extracting teeth are similar to the other instruments mentioned. This suggests that the tools used for tooth extraction may be similar in design or function to the other surgical instruments described in this text, such as forceps and levers. The specifics of each tool and its intended use may vary depending on the nature of the procedure being performed.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skillful and subtle artisan should understand for himself what this means regarding the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not know or use specific instruments, due to their diverse forms in different species. This indicates that the practice of medicine has evolved over time, and that new tools and techniques have been developed to address a wider range of health issues.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if there is a fracture, then apply a cast to that area with what is appropriate for it regarding instruments and forceps as we have discussed in the removal of teeth incision, and assist yourself with this gesture whose shape is:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	It should be gradually widened, and held in place within the mouth so that it does not escape or fall out before the bone is completely healed; then restore the area with appropriate medications. This passage appears to describe the process of applying a cast to a broken jaw or other bones in the mouth. The cast must be carefully widened over time to allow for proper healing, and should be held securely in place within the mouth to prevent it from shifting or falling out. Additionally, the area should be treated with appropriate medications to promote healing and prevent infection.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small purulence in the bone, then remove that from the purulence and its blackness, and heal it within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Here is the next line to translate. Again, please do not add any comments:
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Here is the next line to translate:
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are protruding not according to their natural shape, the form is illegal, and more so in women and especially in venerable virgins; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is adjacent to another tooth, and it cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then uproot that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it out with this instrument of which the shape is as follows: similar to a pig's snout, made from sharp Indian steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Then make your incision with the instrument you will use to cut out the tooth in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure it does not harm any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is swollen due to grinding, then grind it down with an Indian steel file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	The file and marguerite should both be made of Indian steel; they should have many small points like a lima used to make needles, with which the tooth will be ground down little by little in several days for ease, so that no other tooth is harmed and it does not fall out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then bring the end of the file to the tip, and remove the end with another razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a tooth is broken and pierces the tongue, you must grind it down until the sharp edge of that fragment is removed and sealed, and it should be filled to prevent the tongue from being injured or the speech from being distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Here is the next line to translate:
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Here is the next line to translate:
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are knocked out due to a blow or hunting and the patient is unable to bite down on anything to eat, and you have treated it with stiffening medications but your treatment has not worked, then, so that they do not rot, strengthen them with gold wire, not silver, for silver becomes soft and can be dissolved in a few days, while gold does not change.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The wire should be of such subtlety and thickness suitable for the space between the teeth; and the shape of the binding is that you take the wire and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and grow the twists in the wire between the damaged teeth, or one or several of them, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Place the dressing over the damaged area and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is healed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your binding should tighten the wire of the teeth so that they do not loosen.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess wire with forceps or pliers and add it in each place as needed, and bend them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And seal it tightly with wax like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen it or them in this manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	Here is the form and figure of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, sometimes intertwined as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two return to their natural position after being knocked out and grow back as recommended and remain healthy.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done by inexperienced or unskilled people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	In some cases, a cow's bone is used as a tooth replacement, shaped like a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, tightened as previously mentioned, and remains serving for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Here is the next line to translate:
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Cut the ligament that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that appears on the tongue sometimes naturally or which one has, or it is accidental and happens due to a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is to open the mouth of the patient and hold his head with yours; lift his tongue and incise the ligament nerve as far back as necessary until the tongue is free from its recent growth.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or toughness, and it is fixed by the consolidation of a wound, then you throw oil and cut through it as far back as you have incised the ligament and the toughness has been removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a gap in the skin during the incision and that you cut through the arch only and let blood flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the wound with water or vinegar or warm water; and place a clean linen cloth on it, this is what will keep the patient from having to put his tongue in his mouth every night until it has not consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is bleeding, place a wet piece of vinegar on it; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the area with a light cautery, which is suitable for that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And apply this treatment for other causes until it has been healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes a small ranula appears on the tongue, resembling a small pimple, preventing its normal operation; and it grows considerably inside the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation is to open the mouth of the patient in front of you, and examine the ranula.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a dark or black, hard, and insensitive lump that the patient does not feel, do not touch it for fear of cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white with moisture, in which there is humidity, then you put oil on it and incise it with a thin spatula from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you place wet vinegar on it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work until you have treated it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other treatment for it until it has been healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of an ear abscess and that which is nothing in the ear canal, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When pus accumulates in the ear canal, it is glands similar to pus, which appear outside and are called double ears, which when you treat with what has been said in the previous division and it does not heal, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, insensitive, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red-colored and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron due to bleeding; let it mature, and then either you remove it or it breaks by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white-colored, rounded and the root is thin, it should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation is to consider whether the abscess has rested after being cauterized with complete rest or whether it has decreased with some decrease; and then you prepare the patient in front of you, his head on your lap, open his mouth, and a servant holds his tongue away from him with a noble instrument, which has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is made of silver or iron, and it is thin like a scalpel.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press the tongue and show the abscess to you, put oil on it and place it in the instrument, and pull it out from all sides as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or when you pull for some reason of the layers, then incise it with an instrument that has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is similar to forceps, but the extensions of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is opposite to the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron, but covered with silver.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then make an incision with the sharp end of it, not the blunt end.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after making an incision, make the second one according to this method of incision, and ensure that the patient protects it from cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is bleeding, protect it with a decoction of blackthorn or myrtle leaf and similar to those used for cauterization until the bleeding stops, and care for it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes we treat other abscesses or those two ear abscesses by incising them as I have said about the incision of two wounds together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I treated a woman with an abscess that was located in her ear, which had a dark color, little sensitivity, and had closed the ear canal of its own accord. The woman was breathing with difficulty and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water for some time, and she would have died within a day or two if it hadn't stopped.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had grown so much that it burst after about two days through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I will make an incision and insert it into one of the ear canals, pull it out along with the large part, then incise the other hole where I will find the other end, and hold the opening of it, compress the tongue, and insert the ear canal into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I will cut out a large piece of it, and there is only a little bleeding.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the woman's ear canal is completely healed, and she should start drinking water immediately, and ensure proper nutrition, so I will not continue to incise the abscess for a long time, and an abscess will form in its place, which I will incise when it has grown.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I will burn and cauterize the woman's ear canal, so that it heals faster; and I will walk around and not know what God has in store for me about this.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of an abscess in the liver.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the liver is affected by catarrh and it becomes an abscess that is long, it is called vertical; and if it is in the lower thick and round part, it is called a cyst.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what has been said in the division, and it does not respond to your treatment, and there are sometimes abscesses that have already healed and are subtle, you must incise the round one; and if it is long and bleeding, of dark or black color, and not sensitive, you must be careful with the incision, for there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see one that follows the method I have mentioned with its whiteness and length, you should squeeze the patient's hand and press their tongue against an instrument shaped like it, and insert the ear canal into the new one, pull it down and incise it with one of the two instruments mentioned in the incision of two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	You must not incise it unless it is located at the natural boundary without addition, for if you incise more than that, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you must use an instrument for cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in it is not with anything other than sharp water. Place your hand on the patient's head and press their tongue against the instrument I have mentioned, and take a small amount of the water we have described in the section on cauterization, and apply it to the live part without pressing too hard or too gently, and fill the concavity of the instrument with that.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extramarginal part of the concavity in which the medicine has been placed should be like the concavity of a spoon, and the instrument with the medicine should be placed on the uvula. Let the patient drink water through his nose so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows into the intrinsic medicine, to prevent any of those causes from affecting the ear canal and softening it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine on it and press it against the uvula for about an hour until you see it darken and become numb from the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you want, take a cotton ball and wrap it around the end of the ray, dip the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as needed for the desired result from the cauterization of the uvula, and let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and avoid the cauterization around the uvula with a damp cotton pad, clean it with what is in the circuit of the medicine, let it be washed with cold water, healed outside with embrocation, and protected inside until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This species of cure is preserved by being cautiously incised and kept long.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some throats are cured with what is called subtile cautery and incision, for it is cured by the method of subfumigation: take gently, ysop, origan, ruda, scicados arabic, camomilla, bruyere and similar herbs, and place all these herbs, or some of them, in a bowl, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the bowl be well beaten with a spoon, and let there be a hole, on which an instrument shall be placed to prevent it from spilling out. Let it be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Let the tip of the instrument enter into the mouth of the patient up to the area where the steam can reach the uvula over which the uvula is masked.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then return to the places of those throats that are dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of abscess development, for it would aggravate the abscess, and it is not necessary to do so, but rather you should make the declaration of abscess with caution.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not present at hand, then take a cane and make a hole in the end of it filled with honey, so that the patient's mouth is closed, for the plug of honey prevents the steam from burning the patient's mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capital XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and what sticks in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Throats sticking to the throat or a splinter from the feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract what is visible from those things, over which the eye falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat is made clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is concealed in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since the cause adhered to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of bread or raisin or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge, squeeze it strongly and forcefully, and make the patient swallow it, since when it reaches the place where the thorns are located, they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	But take an eel and boil it in water, then strain it and extract it with a spoon; or take a pot and put it on the fire and when it boils, pour it out and drink it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes mentioned above are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Let it be thick as a reed but narrow in the end, and there should be a concavity in the end that you can insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	The patient should raise his head upwards and be careful not to touch the back of his skull with his throat, since this may cause damage to the neck or splinter the bone or the thorn, or the doctor may do so with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient enters into this more easily, it is better because of his knowledge of the location of the adhered cause and he presses downwards and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the amount that was prepared beforehand so that it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood clot adhered to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood clot is treated with what was mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and does not improve, consider then in the throat of the patient at the sole, since you have already anesthetized the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see an abscess, extract it gently and carefully with a small or pointed instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the abscess, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, place your hand in the concavity of the cannula with a hot iron, do this as many times (until the abscess is dead and removed from the wound) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a small water-filled bladder, open its mouth in that place, and rinse the opening with that; do not let any cause pass through it and allow the water to stay for an hour at a time, as the abscess will soon notice the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the tool recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it falls (the abscess).
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation is that you take an oil in which charcoal is ignited and the oil is covered with a lid on one side of which there is a hole, and the end of the tool should be inserted into this hole; and stop the patient's mouth over the opening of the cannula and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the abscess, as the abscess will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If it does not fall, you should repeat the fumigation several times and keep the patient from drinking, eating salted and alkaline foods, and not drinking water; and it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the tool used to treat abscesses in wounds when seen, and it resembles a pair of forceps like those sometimes, but with some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The handle should be placed in the wound, and the end of it is shaped like the beak of a stork, which is hollow, sharpened with a file, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not release.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	This is the summary of the sermon on the topic of abscesses and their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various species, of multiple types, as remembered from them in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in their penetration and excision of them by two methods, one of which is for abscesses that grow within themselves; and because of the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is for locations where accidents of the body occur, as an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the anus; and an abscess in a fleshly location is different from one at a joint. And each of these has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	However, some abscesses should not be perforated except for the maturation of the pus or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that should be drained when they are hard, and not allowed to mature according to their course, include those near joints, as an abscess near a joint will continue to grow until the surrounding tissue is purged or the nerves of that joint are corrupted, which can cause contraction of the affected limb; or an abscess in a main organ, and if you delay the draining of it for too long, it can spread to the main organ; or one in the anus, therefore drain it before it matures; and it is not necessary to drain a hard abscess from the digestive tract, but rather the one that is in the anus, as it may cause prolonged pain if left untreated and could lead to a fistula or abscess near the anus that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You must know the time of the abscess's perforation, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	When the pain subsides and the fever ceases, when there is a reduction in swelling and pulse, when the abscess's head becomes more acute and other symptoms appear, then it is time for incision.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that the perforation should be made at a spot below the abscess, and from where pus is coming out for treatment of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation should be made along the flesh or body if abscesses are in the groin or feet and at the joints of the limbs, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait for confirmation of its digestion before perforating, as we have said; because if you perforate too soon, you prolong the course of the pus and move it, and harden the edges and deepen the cavity.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body as needed, or according to what that member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	You must make a small perforation in small abscesses and a large and wide or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Some abscesses that require the cavity to be concave and incised are done in such a way that they appear like bread and butter or when they are ripe, as in cases of tumors and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	Of those that are incised and have three corners; and of these is the one that is incised like a myrtle leaf figure, as in the abscesses of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are given round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case of superficial abscesses that do not have a specific form, you should perforate it with a surface or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has collected pus, you must perforate it but do not rush to extract all the pus at that time; after extracting part of it, leave the abscess inside for another day, and then extract a larger part, and perform multiple observances according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is old, weak or a woman in labor, or a young child, then the animal spirit can be resolved with the exit of pus, and the patient may die as a result, so you should be careful with them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter and your perforation of these abscesses, as you must avoid wounds and consider whether the abscess wound is small or a flat incision; in such cases, administer one or two antiseptics; but if the abscess is large and the incisions are many, then you must wait for each to heal before proceeding.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess part of the cavity is removed or you have concaved it around its circumference, then you must seal it with old cote or thread made from cloth, like when you dress wounds or bandages, without moisture; and let it heal for three days; and process and cure it with the same care as for wounds until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the operation, administer cold water and wine diluted in linen cloth, and let it rest on the site of the bleeding for a while.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, you must administer treatment and cure and powder as I have recommended in various places of this book and elsewhere.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then you must apply powder in wine and warm oil and let it rest on those areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must let the powder sit in water and oil or wine and oil, and let it rest until the third day as we have said, and then remove the abscess and clean it and administer to its cure whatever is appropriate for it until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the different methods of treatment that I have previously described for each type of abscess in specific chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On incision of abscesses that come in the cavity of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses and special types of swellings in the head cavity, which contain membranes that are formed from them; and their types are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	Some have blisters, and others contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those are the ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and of those are the ones that are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in this section, and in the extraction of those, there should be no fear, as the extraction of them does not harm the archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in this section of those is that you probe them with an instrument having the shape appropriate for this purpose, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it contains moisture, then cut it with a section following its length using a shallow surface section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision at line B and continue to line G. Once the moisture is drained, scrape that area where the moisture was located, but do not leave any cause for it to return, as observed excesses often recur if there is still a cause remaining.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in warm Egyptian clay if it is available, or in water and salt; fill that with the wound and leave it to soak for another day, as the warm solution will dissolve everything that has been broken through the skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then apply warm Egyptian clay to the wound twice a day if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause for the skin layer to be broken; once the wound has healed, care for it with warm water.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If an abscess contains fatty nodules, then make an incision in it using this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In this section, make an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut along both sides of the incision and remove it completely from all sides, and use your strength to extract the membrane containing it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	However, if it damages your bow (arm), then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, perform surgery and treatment on the abscess as you have told me; and incision on an abscess is easy because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Certainly, some abscesses are hard in some men whose heads have no moisture at all; the cause is because you incise an abscess on a woman's old head as if it were hard stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone struck it with percussion, it would hurt him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not applicable, such as abscesses that come to the heads of children and you should remove the earlobes, but the incision of these ones shall be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their body to relieve the pain at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat them with what is appropriate for their treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Frequently examine these abscesses in the neck and shoulders and in other places; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is known as its own skin, and just as in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are nodules, for some of them are hard, and those containing moisture are soft, and the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you see with good disposition in the Examination, of which the color of what is evident is similar to that of a quince seed, and it is bad all over, and not attached to the neck nerve, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and not pointed, so you should incise it with a superficial incision above the body line of G to the body line of B, and remove it completely from every side, and extend two lips of the quince seed or one quince seed lip if you have a need for them, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not adjust to your hand or disturb the patient, and let you incise what is necessary to incise; for if you incise vein or artery and prohibit your action, then stop the wound with quicklime plaster or other powders which cause bleeding, and dress the wound, and leave it until it recovers from the abscess, and let the wound become softened and change into pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your action until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask your assistant whether there is any other cause of the small scrofulas, so you can incise them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the excision of a large scrofula vein, so you should not incise that scrofula from its excision.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Afterwards, you must press it firmly with a fold and let it fall into itself without damage.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you incise the entire scrofula, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as there is no further excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	However, if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, then understand to excise its opening, remove it and provide suture and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	The soft scrofulas containing moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation at the place of maturation of them, and stop the perforation of what is the base pus of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Provide perforation, lime water and similar, to corrode what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with general flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pilon in the abscess that occurs at the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this incision on the pilon, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of their sermon.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	However, in men having hernia, it should be avoided the extraction of the pilon, because all veins and major ones of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	However, in those who have cauterized abscesses in the mouth or groin or both earlobes, when the illness is not in the canal, it is necessary to avoid the incision of the pilon to avoid the danger that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to make an incision on the epiglottis, we should cut it into three circles of the epiglottis' circles, or four with a small section along its length where there are two circles in quantity, but the section should be in cartilage, not bone, and this location is suitable for the incision, as it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of it are close.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is inexperienced, then you should extend the neck of the goiter and make an incision on the neck up to where it reaches the throat, but avoid cutting any blood vessels if possible.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make an incision in the cervix as recommended, and it is intended on the section of the throat where the tumor is located that has been broken and due to the abscess of the vocal cords.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time comes when perforation is feared, apply two layers of gauze to the wound, but only on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medications that make the flesh heal within.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Therefore, Albusas tells us that the summary of the sermon that we have recommended is nothing more than a vein from which some of those boils have already drained the goiter of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his body is cut open, and some will make an incision in the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound due to some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, we command that the wound be left open until the malice of the illness is consumed, and this takes three days, and then you should close the wound and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	What I have seen myself, is that a servant struck him with a knife in the neck and made an incision in one part of his windpipe, and I was called to cure him, and I found the woman in such a state as if she were dead, and I uncovered the wound and found blood that had been drained from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were confessed that she had not cut a vein or trachea, and the wound bled, and you cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not harm her if there was not an abscess in the vocal cords, and after some days return to improvement of her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now tell me that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On a section on an abscess that occurs outside the neck, which is called goiter hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This goiter hernia abscess is a large abscess according to the color of the body and it is a disease in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can be of two types, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case of a natural goiter hernia, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental type has two forms, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other form is similar to an abscess that is made by the compression of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is not necessary to make a presumption of him unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine him and investigate him with the said method, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes that are not suspended in any of the veins, then you should remove it as you would remove nodes, extracting it along with its root and bursa; but if it is not, you should investigate his entire being, and treat the area with whatever is needed for treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of incision of lymph node areas.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the swellings of the lymph nodes. And I have already said all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary to distinguish between a node and an abscess when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the ebullition of the excess matter subsides; it is putrid decay which now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain; it contains that hard mass which is in the sack itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And depending on the color of the body, it begins like a cyst and is made like a bladder, either large or small, and there are two types: either fatty with moisture, and the colors of moisture are swollen, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, extract it and investigate it at its beginning, where there is a stone which is called intromis, as will appear in the chapter that is appropriate for this purpose.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the method of investigation of boils and all nodes, that is: you take this stone and introduce it into the location that is most moist in the abscess, and you rotate your thumb with it little by little until you know that the stone has penetrated the cyst.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the intromis and consider what comes out as evidence of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the running moisture (pus) is forgotten of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial cut, as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no pus found from the intromis, you know that it is fatty (granuloma).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry it over it with a lancet in this cross shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, hang it up with a hook, and incise the cyst from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or bag, if possible, over it and extract the purulent matter along with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy part, and you will find that it has become putrid, and then you extract it in pieces until there remains no cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause (pus or inflammation), either a little or too much, the node should be returned as soon as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you see that a small part remains, you complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and let it heal, and place caution over the abscess that was treated, and treat the other one with another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the node is large, you cut the two lips of it and care for it as described in its nature (surgical removal).
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is pulsatile vein on the opposite side, or no pulsatile vein, you close and fill the wound with lime (calcium carbonate) and let it dry for two to three days until the wound heals and stops the bleeding from the wound; then return to incise what has grown from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the types of stones necessary in incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of intromis (stones), and there are three types: one is large, another is middling, and the other is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large intromis is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a medium-sized intromis is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small intromis is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, aluminum, copper or brass tips, well-fashioned so that they pierce the intromis in abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experienced individuals (surgeons), and they are called scalpels, and one of them is called a lancet.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	There are three types, namely large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced individual (surgeon) is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experienced individual (surgeon) is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced individual (surgeon) is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems to be a recommendation that these conditions - abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, buboes (boils) - are caused by bones or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	It is suggested that they be treated with large needles or leeches, which are sewn through the skin using thick threads made of iron, silver, or silver, and the best treatment is with leeches made of lemon juice.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are to be treated with black plums, for which the experienced ones recommend opening the cavities of the fistulas and then reflecting the contents back into them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it is of three types, for some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Make a large lead plug:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Make a medium-sized lead plug:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Make a small lead plug:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the onions are of several types, for some are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are to be chopped or pureed, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onions with two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onions with three curves, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Preparation for the large simple onion shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple Unguent Formula:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple Ointment Formula (one-eighth):
Forma de unci orp gran:	Formula for a large ounce (full):
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Formula for half an ounce (one-half):
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Formula for a quarter of an ounce (one-quarter):
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Formula for a large ounce with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Formula for a half ounce with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Formula for a quarter ounce with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Formula for a large ounce with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Formula for a half ounce with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Formula for a quarter ounce with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which they are cut and scraped the nodes and abscesses, and there are three types, as one is large, another half, and the third small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Formula for a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Formula for a half-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Formula for a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external edges of those (scalpel blades) that are cut are sharp and the other external edges are not sharp, and they should not be used in this manner, but rather used to aid in the scraping of nodes with the concern of incision of vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and brings a little peace through the cauterization which brings peace to the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of alum, and there are three types: large, half, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The formula for large magda (a herb or medicinal plant):
Forma de magda migier:	Form of midwife: [This line does not contain a complete statement or question in the given text. The following lines would typically provide more context for a complete translation. However, I can guess that it might be referring to "the role/method of a midwife" based on the context of medical procedures mentioned earlier.]
Forma de magda pauc:	Method of the midwife: [This sentence is incomplete and lacks context without additional lines. The next lines may provide more clarity for the correct translation.]
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of herbs and resemble a king's balm, which is used to alleviate [pain/illness].
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the external side with small holes and hidden with sponge, and then to move towards the vaginal area, either inside or outside, whenever you wish, just like when urinating.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of sponges, which are hidden between the teeth, should be used for the perforation of abscesses without the patient feeling it, and there are three types: large, midwife, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of: [This line does not contain a complete statement or question in the given text. The following lines would typically provide more context for a complete translation. However, I can guess that it might be referring to "these are the forms of sponges" based on the context of medical procedures mentioned earlier.]
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of bloodletting lancets, which are used to extract the flow of blood, and there are three types: large, midwife, and small. The forms of these: [This line does not contain a complete statement or question in the given text. The following lines would typically provide more context for a complete translation. However, I can guess that it might be referring to "these are the forms of bloodletting lancets" based on the context of medical procedures mentioned earlier.]
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus fruit, round with some length, and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these types of bloodletting lancets: large, midwife, and small, for the purpose of quickly extracting bloodflow when necessary, and you should not use them in the initial stages without medication.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to extract blood in any part of the body, and only in areas with flesh such as the armpits, thighs, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar areas with fleshly folds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veins are made of these small instruments resembling fish scalpels according to this form; through which blood is extracted when performed by phlebotomy, or for the incision of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round according to this form: [This line does not contain a complete statement or question in the given text. The following lines would typically provide more context for a complete translation. However, I can guess that it might be referring to "and some veins are made round" based on the context of medical instruments mentioned earlier.]
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii. [This line appears to be the title or chapter number for a section in the treatise, but it is not in the original language and may have been added by a later editor or translator.]
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts which are similar to female ones. [This line provides context for the previous lines about veins, and it appears that the text is discussing medical procedures for treating conditions in men that resemble those found in women.]
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins in men's breasts become swollen during sleep like scabs, and the breasts become swollen, resembling those of women, and they develop abscesses, which should be drained, cauterized, and kept clean.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who has this condition, it is necessary to incise it with a lunar section according to this form from line B to line G, and then excise all the pus, fill the wound with carbolic medicine, sew the lips of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	However, if the breast descends towards the groin and becomes softened like in women, then it should be cut in half along its upper surface with two incisions resembling a lunar shape, where each one is contained within the other according to this form from line B to line G. Excise the cords that are between the lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make due to the distress of the patient and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with a thin layer of corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the tissue that has turned gangrenous, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii. [This line appears to be the title or chapter number for a section in the treatise, but it is not in the original language and may have been added by a later editor or translator.]
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that arise near the nipple. [This line provides context for the previous lines about breast conditions, and it appears that the text is discussing a specific type of medical procedure.]
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses near the nipple are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contains a sack. [This line describes the type of abscess that is being discussed in the following lines.]
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you should fill it with dry gauze and leave it for another day. [This line explains the procedure for treating certain types of abscesses near the nipple.]
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And the dressing should be changed and the area treated with appropriate ointment until it heals. [This line concludes the section on treating abscesses near the nipple.]
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes or scrofula is: [This line introduces a new type of abscess being discussed.]
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the sore has spread to such an extent that it exudes pus, then administer cautionery as previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	In the fortieth Chapter...
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incisions of abscesses that occur by arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the shaft that lies over it becomes consolidated, it may cause an abscess and signs that indicate whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess is caused by an arrow, it runs along the front of the chest; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, it will emit a sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is rounded at the manifestation of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If an incision is made on the abscess, it is an error, especially in the areas of the shoulders, neck, and various parts of the body; and it is large, so its healing should be avoided, and if it is near the extremities or head, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	However, on the one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, make an incision along the shaft and then cut through the sheath; and open the incision with scissors and remove the arrow, and deliver the tunics up to where it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the point of the awl on the other side and make it penetrate through that layer, and then extract the arrow by pulling it out in two places, which causes bleeding; but this is a good sign for your extraction of two arrows that are within the temple area.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And prick the place between the ligaments with a lance and let blood flow out until it is all drained, and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cure that generates purge until the ligaments fall off; and treat it with appropriate treatments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to an incision of a vein, then you must have at hand everything that is possible for treating the abscess and the wound; and insert the awl into the place where your hand has been, and make it penetrate through that layer; and use double thread until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you in the uva4 ligament between the two parts and at the ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	However, if you fear that the thread will break, then insert the awl into the abscess and make the first incision of the awl; and tighten your four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Cut the abscess into the middle of it so that when you extract what is inside, then cut away the excess of the sheath and leave what remains connected.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place a cushion of powder that you have soaked in wine and oil over the swelling, and apply the cure that is made with heat and cold until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter I: Abscess due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess may occur in an arrow wound or vein, and similarly an abscess may occur in nerves when it occurs due to a blow or excessive labor, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is most often found in the areas of the joints or ankles, or in any place where the joints are injured.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a serious abscess, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is located in the larger areas that are swollen due to its pressure; and when the patient feels the pain, it appears like stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess that runs along the front of the chest, and therefore, it does not have a sheath; it is damaged in all areas and does not extend towards the front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not necessary for those suffering in the joints to be wrapped with iron, because great cold will inevitably follow contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, one who has a headache or pain in the forehead is treated with spittle (saliva).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then you should use forceps and drain it.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is big, you should suspend it with unguent (ointment), excise it, and apply a dressing to it; then sew up the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 1.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of abscess section that happens near the mouth that happens in the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Soften thickened areas in the stomach and other parts of the body in those patients who are affected by what is called funguals (fungus) because it resembles those found in mushrooms, for whose roots are subtle but the heads are large; and the lips of these have already been opened, and it is a small one or an enlarged one.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its stomach there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, but there was no difference between them in color or small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and bind one with eighteen inches of thread. And the other with five inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in incision of theirs is that you should consider if the patient is humid, and the color of his urine is white, moist, subtle in size; then you should incise it with a cold knife, and be present to cauterize it over the fire because many veguadas (pus) will be expelled with little blood; and if there is bleeding, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and afraid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but take a new lead (lead) pill and hold it to the urine, using the method mentioned earlier; leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tie it in the narrowing of the lead pill; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the thick lead until it is excised and falls off on its own without work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if it is of large size, you should make incision on it where there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially if it is in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the entirety of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise a dark-colored, small, hard and regular growth because that is cancerous abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I will remind you of the crab related to this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 2.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of the navel in a prominent way.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel is treated for various reasons: either due to fissures on the abdomen, from which tissues or intestines protrude as in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by compressed bowel wind.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to abdominal fissure and the protrusion of tissue, then the appearance of the boil is similar to that of the body; and it is lion-like in pain, and it appears in various ways.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then you must place it in the position where it had been previously retracted with much greater diversity; and when you press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and return it; and strong pressure is needed there, and it must be introduced with forceful bathing and vigorous effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it does not become hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor is it painful.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the boil appears black and darkening in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to rotten flesh, then the boil is heavy, large and hard, and it becomes filled up to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to wind, then the touch of it is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in this case is to consider whether the swelling of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind; and if it is, you must refrain from treating it, because in such cases there is fear and dread, as taught in the chapter where abscesses from arteries and veins have been discussed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the swelling of the navel is due to intestine or tissue, you must order the patient to lie on their back and remain extended; then hold the patient's abdomen taut in a circle around the entire navel, and order them to remain facing upwards between your hands; then surround the navel with a thin piece of cloth around the area that you have marked with the tension; and extend the size of the boil at the incision lines until it is very large; and tie it in the circle with strong thread or cord, taking care to make the tying method proper.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you cut the boil's incision across the middle and insert your finger into it to search for intestine; if you have not found or secured it with the ligament, then you extract any excrement and force the intestine back into the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found tissue, then you take it with one hand; and cut away any superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is in opposition to an artery or vein, you surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and tie them with strong thread, and insert the needles into the circuit around the boil as described earlier, making them penetrate; then tighten the boil in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched skin to fall back into place; or cut that which is thin and can be easily torn, and then care for it with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the swelling of the navel is due to rotten flesh in it or moisture, then you must collapse the boil as previously stated and remove the blood or moisture that you find there, securing it; and care for it with ointments and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of crabs (pediculosis pubis).
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have previously discussed the species of crabs and the method of treating it with medications, and we have stated that its cure should be swift to avoid ulcers; and we have stated that crabs are born from filth and caution in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes crabs can be eradicated from certain places where it is possible to do so, such as on the head or in the genitals, and they recommended removing all such crabs, especially when they are small at first.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it becomes old and large, you should not attempt to remove it, because it cannot be cured or I have never seen anyone succeed in doing so, nor has it been achieved before.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation in this case is as previously stated, that you should precede the patient and purge them of black bile for several days, and then fumigate them if there is obvious repletion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with the preparations necessary for the operation, and procure any tools that are required; and ensure that the bed is well prepared with good linen until no cause of the itching remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow out, and do not let it be abscessed lightly, squeeze the places, and remove the coagulated blood entirely with your hand or instrument, whichever is possible for you among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you encounter difficulties with large blood clots in a vein or an artery, then cauterize it where the flow of blood stops, and care for it with other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Title: Chapter IV (Latin: Caput IV)
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of edema.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have previously recommended, in the division, the types of edema caused by water and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is treated with iron is only the type of edema caused by dropsy alone, and iron should not be used for the types of edema such as tympanites or hypoedema, because it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this type of edema caused by tympanites with medicines and do not see improvement, then consider, since if the patient has achieved debility or is suffering from another form of edema such as that in the throat or abdomen (similar to those), then take care not to treat it with iron, for there is fear over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient with an excessive amount of vitality and not suffering from any other illness except edema alone, without infancy or old age, then the method for the operation is to lift the patient with your hands, and minister to him by pressing his abdomen with your hand, expel water from the lower part of the liver in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The reed should be of two sharp points, with a pointed end like a spatula; however, it should be of some small length, little by little, so that during the operation you do not enter the intestine, and you do not injure it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, since in that case you must distance yourself from the navel by about three finger widths to the right of the navel above the liver.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of edema is due to a disease of the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by about three finger widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is necessary that your incision be above the rib where you wish for the patient to lie so that fluids do not collect at that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the diaphragm with the instrument and enter the incision, lift your hand with the reed between the diaphragm and sphincter, and you will extract it; if the amount is about one nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the sphincter until the reed reaches the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you extract it and insert an instrument in the shape of:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's hide, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and at the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it has a sharp point at its end like a feather, such as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	At the upper end of it (the instrument) is an armlet, because when the instrument is put in water, then take it off immediately from the instrument to evacuate the appropriate amount of water, for if you evacuate more than needed at that time, the patient may soon die due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or the quinsy (a complication of tonsillitis) which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"Evacuate the appropriate amount based on the potency of the liquid and according to what you observe about the patient's pulse and his condition."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"Then take out the instrument and retain the water that causes it, as soon as it is retained by the stopper that retains the hole on the tip of which you are recommended to pierce it in that manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"Repeat the process on another day if the patient tolerates it, and draw a small amount of water, doing so for several days with caution, and ensure that there is not excessive water left."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are worried about the patient and release a large amount of water, then treat him with burial in hot sand, and rub him with soap, and wait for a long time in the sun; and treat him with drying medicines until he is cured."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"Cauterize the stomach, and the liver and spleen near the water extraction, as I have previously mentioned in what is stated before."
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 45.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose lochs are not perforated by urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born with his umbilical cord not perforated (or narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it must be cauterized immediately upon birth with a thin sponge in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	"Then insert a small leaden pin through the hole and tie it, leaving it for three or four days."
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	"And when he wishes to urinate and has discharged his semen, return him."
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	"If you do not tie the lead, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not close this opening."
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	"But if the hole is narrow, treat it with a leaden pin as previously mentioned, for several days until it is widened."
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	"But in those cases where the hole is not in its place, they are led, which occurs because in such cases the umbilical cord is cut off at the end of the spine, preventing urination between the thighs. Until the penis is raised to the thighs with the hand, this should not happen; it is not for generation, as the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a serious illness."
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	"The method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong extraction. Then cut off the tip of the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp spatula or feather, so that the meat of it resembles the head of the penis and the hole falls in the appropriate place as needed."
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	"And be aware that in your operation of blood flow, this often happens; therefore, pause at that point where you cause the bleeding and treat the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lvi.	Title or Chapter. LVI (64 in Roman numerals)
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the albuginea that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and pus, corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motes (growths) frequently occur in this albuginea on the penis and are prominences of fleshly growth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one (type of growth) is malignant and another is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it should be suspended with a thin thread and cut off the affected part until it is completely removed; then place a suppository of Egyptian balm on the submerged area and apply it daily until healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albuginea is malignant and discolored, it is necessary to administer cautionery near its incision and its base.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albuginea is in the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, you must remove the albuginea that is inside first until it is consolidated; then treat the outside, for when you treat the outside along with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not be crushed.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Moreover, blackness and corruption often occur in the genitals and foreskin; therefore it is necessary to hollow out everything that has become degenerate or is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then line this with a solution made from scorched wheat flour and three times sifted and sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then apply the other treatment until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, administer cautionery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Cautery is helpful in two ways: for blood flow and for an ulcer when it becomes corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotted and destroyed completely at that time, it is necessary that you insert a lead cannula into the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not recommended for it; and when adhesion occurs due to ulcer or abscess), you must separate it with a blunt spatula until the glue dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to separate them exactly, you must separate the head of the penis and foreskin with a spatula, as the foreskin, when thin, is easily perforated due to its fragility.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has been softened in hot water so that it does not adhere again later.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And apply a styptic to it until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Title or Chapter. LVII (65 in Roman numerals)
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and treatment for those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other diseases: however, since it is our action and its performance is in infants, it is necessary to assign the best method and easiest way possible to preserve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, they did not say circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which I have found that most craftsmen and barbers used circumcision and mutilation with a knife and torches; and they use balm for healing and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have forbidden all these ways and will not find better mutilation with scissors, balm, oil or ointment for mutilation using the nail, because many times the wound heals more slowly, since the skin of the prepuce has two layers, and one layer remains behind, and it is prone to further incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And mutilation which is done for alum-treatment, and it is digital, used by cobblers, is not certain to incise the end of the male organ, since it often enters into its crack.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, iron often corrodes and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the skin of the child is short by nature, and many times it does not need mutilation in this manner, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But mutilation which is done with scissors and oil or ointment for healing, the benefit, experiment has shown me that the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is similar to the sharpness that is below; so when you press your hand in proportionate two sharp points, and make an incision according to a comparison at a time; it compresses the oil or ointment in a figure containing the skin of the genitals from all sides, with which you cannot miss anything.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you let the child stay more if it is one of those who can understand a little, not doing anything but putting oil or ointment on his genitals only, and leaving him alone for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And encourage that child in all ways that is possible according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And encourage that child to stay among your women and be quiet; hide the scissors in your hand or place them under your foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And approach your hand to the genitals of the child and blow on the skin, then pull it out as far as the head of the genitals, and mutilate that part which is attached to the scrotum for cleanliness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And approach the area marked with oil, and tie it down with a thin string below that, and then hold your hand or another person's hand above the ointment at a good tension, and make an incision between two strings.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And lift the skin slightly and stretch the head of the genitals; and let a small amount of blood flow out slowly, which is better; then sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place wool soaked in hog's fat in olive oil recently boiled; leave that on for another day; and heal that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for mutilation, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The one that are not cutting blades and the other is blades, neither of them should exceed the end of the handle, and the length of the two sharp points should be the same as the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in mutilation is that iron often cuts all the inner skin or you should incise a part of it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that with your hand in front of the wound site and make an incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove that with oil and make an incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the wound on the genitals is inflamed and not healed, you should let that out until the wound is cauterized and remove the pus with ease, then make an incision according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the genitals, since it will not be there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore heal that with what the plaster recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the skin is incised to the correct measure and presses the parts above, it will not notice anything.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that with what I said earlier until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or blood clots, or by pebbles or gravel, similar to those that I said in the division of cures.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder's retention is caused by stones that are in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And place the feet of that person on their back and stretch the abdomen above their waist, and the patient should bend their back as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you should constrict the neck of the bladder for expulsion of the stone at the openings behind it, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by the water mentioned previously and the cause becomes severe in the patient, then you must administer extraction of him with an instrument called syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin like a lion's conch, similar to a bird's pen with subtlety of a ray about half a palm long, at the end of which there should be a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine through it is to take the folded fabric or wool and place it on the exterior of it for good adhesion; then insert the fabric's edges into the opening behind the syringe, and cut any superfluous cause of the fabric with scissors, but insert the fabric into the tube forcefully. Then move the syringe towards the bladder and hold it with an alcohol-soaked bandage.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cover the patient with a sheet and wrap the bladder and the penis with olive oil, water, and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis over the opening of the urethra; then push the syringe inward towards the bladder, and the patient should feel relief from the cause as long as this order is followed, not moving in another direction.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And apply the small wool gradually, because the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Remove that and apply a urine cure, use the syringe and do not stop applying it until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 19.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there is an ulceration or boil in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or thickened pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines for that, then do so with an instrument called clamps, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If there is no opening in its exterior, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that are three openings: two on one side, sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave area, in which there is an opening that is blocked by a certain amount of fluid. When any cause is drawn out from this area by the moisture, it should be removed, and when it is expelled, fluid should be added, and when it is expelled completely, as happens with the clamps used during naval battles, the same process should occur.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clamps into the fluid and draw in the fluid that is blocking the openings above it because the fluid will be drawn into the concave area of the clamps.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the end of the clamps into the penis as we recommended with the syringe; then push the fluid through it because that fluid will quickly reach the bladder and provide relief to the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of a subtle clyster with which the bladder is clysterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And made of silver or lead, with the head resembling a small feather and a tube leading inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the bladder from a dead person, and place the fluid you want to clysterize in the bladder, then tie it securely with two strings around it and heat the fluid over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the end of the clyster into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And place your hand over the bladder with the fluid and structure to ensure that the patient feels relief when the fluid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it entirely around its circumference; and then insert a strong string through those openings, which should be twisted as they are inserted; and fill the circle with water and oil as if filling an eggshell, stopping at the fluid you want from the moisture.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And you apply it [the instrument] to that [affected area] and do as you did with the bladder, and press your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	The sixty-first capital or chapter:
De extraccio de peyra.	Chapter on Stone Removal.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	In the previous division, we have discussed the types of stones and their treatment with medications, as well as the difference between bladder stones and kidney stones, along with their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also mentioned the stone that requires surgical removal, as well as the incision to be made during the operation.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Bladder stones specifically are those that are lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we shall now proceed with a detailed and concise explanation of the procedure.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, bladder stones usually affect children; and the symptoms of it are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and appears in sand; and the patient experiences pain in the lower abdomen, and occasionally passes small blood clots; and as a result, there is a frequent urge to defecate.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	The healing of children affected by bladder stones is usually achieved within twelve years, and it is difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in young women, it is more common for surgery to be performed rather than medication.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	If the stone is large and treatment is easier, it is contrary to the case where the stone is small.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, at the beginning of the treatment process, the patient should be examined using a cystoscope that cleans out any obstruction in their bladder, as this sometimes prevents the passage of the stone.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet and be careful that the stone descends towards the base of the bladder or jumps from its location after some periods.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then prepare the patient well, and let their lower parts be exposed, so that the bladder is completely lowered towards the sides outward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then bring forth that and all of it outward.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately cut into it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the whole thing cannot be extracted through touch, you must then anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are a young adult, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then remove the stone that is inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Then gradually turn that small stone towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure on that with your hand and expel it at the sides outside through the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; command another assistant with their right hand to extend the legs apart at the top and with their other hand move the linen which is below the legs, in the area where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert the spatula of this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut it between the rectum and the thighs, not at the middle, near the left side; the incision should be on that stone and your hand should be in the rectum, and the incision should be transverse so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the amount of the stone that can be extracted, and not more, because you should press the stone with your hand which is in the rectum, and this must be done without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that the stone has some parts with angles and edges, which makes it difficult to extract it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, there is a part that resembles an almond and is round, and it is easily extracted.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is that which has angles and margins, do as follows: either you should clamp it properly with a tool appropriate to the task, or insert a curved, fine instrument into the area without removing it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	However, if you cannot clamp it, you should then slightly enlarge the wound and, if you see blood flow, cauterize it with diluted vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	However, if the stone is multiple, begin by inserting your hand into the bladder and then make an incision over it; and place a small instrument near it; and do similarly with larger stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, ignorance lies in making an incision too wide because this may cause harm to the patient, as one of two possible outcomes: either death or continuous urine drainage, because the area has not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	However, administer an emetic to help expel the stone before it leaves the body, or use forceps to extract it through a broken area if necessary.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your task, fill the wound with juice of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a linen cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or olive oil and warm water on the wound to encourage the formation of a cauterized abscess.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Place the patient on their side and do not release the bandages for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Once the bandages are removed, clean and dress the wound with warm water and oil, and cure it with a drying and absorbing agent until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess forms in the wound, apply a drying and corrosive agent to it, similar to if blood is congealed in the bladder, for this is called urinary retention (and this is known by the outflow of blood with urine), so place your thumb in the wound and drain the blood, as if left untreated, it can cause a bladder infection and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with vinegar, warm water, and salt, and apply any other remedy appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire healing process, you should stay with the patient and adjust any medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the penis and obstructs urine flow, you should treat it with remedies that promote expulsion rather than sectioning, as excessive observation during this treatment can lead to complications. I have already spoken of this before, and the remedy is to use a sharp metal probe (the shape of which is:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular external part, sharp, inserted into a rod or shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And grasp the probe firmly and hold it close to the penis where the stone is located so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the probe into the penis with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the probe gently around the small stone with your hand until you make a hole through it, and then the water is released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And press down on the area where the stone has been broken into pieces on the outside of the penis, as it is pierced and drained of urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this treatment cannot be performed for any reason that prevents it, tie a string around the stone and another above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then make an incision in the penis between two scrotal folds.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Remove the bandages and clean the congealed blood in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	Bandages are not required around the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; however, the upper bandage is still necessary, as when the string holding the stone is removed near its exit, the area becomes infected and the wound reopens.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you remove the upper bandage, you should raise the scrotum upwards or let it fall back down to complete your task, as I have said before.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if a stone is found in any of these places, the treatment is difficult and is often prohibited due to its complexity.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first one is because the woman who is not a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to cut if she brings it to the doctor when she is chaste, or from among women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third is because you do not find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is because the location of the section on stones in women is longer than that of stones, therefore it requires deep incision and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity requires this from you, then you must take a woman assistant skilled, and it will be bound up.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that one, then seek a skillful and subtle woman, or present a mature woman experienced in the craft of women, or a woman who has been divided from this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do that, and command her to perform all you will instruct her, from the inquiry of the stone at the beginning; which purpose is to determine if the woman is a virgin, then she should insert her finger into the anus and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, close that off with your finger, and then command her to make an incision on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If the patient is not a virgin, command the midwife to enter her hand into the woman's vagina and examine the stone (the kidney), as she places her left hand on the bladder and compresses it firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Once the stone has been located, it is necessary to gently guide it from the bladder opening towards the vaginal partition until it reaches the place of the womb.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert the finger into that junction of the woman's cervix and find the stone in the womb from any side it is located, and press the stone firmly against that partition so that the stone does not move away from the cervix.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Make the incision small at the beginning; then insert the knife into that area and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, as you know how large the stone is expected to be extracted through it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Know that the types of stones are seeds: for some it is small and large, hard and rough, long and round, with roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many types there are of these stones, for what you intend to signify.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you want to drain blood, adjust the location with crushed vitriol and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone has been expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare your tools for the removal of stones in men's bodies, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to drain blood and know that the expulsion of blood is through an artery that is incised, then you pause powder over the location and press it with pulverizers and tighten the ligature, but do not apply any pressure; allow the stone to remain and do not extract it, for great harm could befall the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Care for the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Once the flow of blood has ceased and the wound heals, return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (62).
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia of the inguinal region.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is not simply an accumulation of moisture in the scrotum that contains the bladder, and it is called a scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes the swelling is in the scrotum itself, which nature has prepared for it near the bladder until it becomes another bladder; and this is the bladder between the white scrotum that we have mentioned, and it is not just that.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the bladder, so this matter accumulates there; sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the bladder.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has stones of various colors: its color may be yellowish or blood-red, red, black and putrid, or watery white, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known that this water accumulation occurs are: if it is in the white scrotum that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round and extends slightly in length like a bladder figure, and the bladder can be seen, as the moisture contains it all over.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the scrotum itself, then the abscess is round and separated from the bladder, and for this reason it is estimated that it is another bladder.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the bladder and the white scrotum, make an incision at the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To know the color of the moisture, examine the color of the moisture in the abscess by cutting open the cavity whose shape is preceded; and based on the findings from the cavity, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of this disease, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if possible, and sometimes empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Place a soft bed under the patient's back on some occasion for a short time and let him rest with many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place yourself on the left side of the patient and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who should stretch out his hand from two fingers to the bladder and the area of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Take a broad stick and cut the bladder in half from the same location up to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision according to a straight line parallel to the line of the pubic hairs, until it reaches the white scrotum encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Remove it, observe it, and note that you do not make another incision; and your excision that was made through the separation should be suspended more gently and more finely examined compared to the excision according to the size possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Approach, puncture the bladder filled with water with a wide incision, and drain all the water out of it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Approach and separate the labia majora of the vulva with stitches, spread it apart; do not touch the ligaments that connect the bladder to the genitals, and make an incision in the bladder in such a way as is feasible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Make the incision all the way through or in pieces, and especially its thin side, because if you do not scrutinize the incision carefully, it is not assured that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if the water flows out from beyond its ligament during your operation, then when you have completed the bladder incision, return it within, and then sew together the two labia majora of the vagina with stitches, and take care of the wound in the same way as other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you find that the water has become corrupted due to another disease, then it is necessary for you to remove the supporting vessels, extract the water, and treat the wound as I have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the water accumulates in two parts as an example, then you know that there are hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other operation; and if it is visible that it is a hernia, then you should perform the operation.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Approach and place the linen, immerse it in oil or red oil, and place another linen that you have soaked in wine and oil on top of it, spreading it over two genitals and the abdomen; then place doubled and padded cloths over it, and lie them down with the string that is shaped like this:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Approach and press two cloths soaked in camomile-infused linen as shown; make the ends of the cloths that are pressed with cotton or damp linen meet with each other, and tie them together with a string in the waistband of the underwear; one end should grasp the anus between the buttocks, and the other should grasp at the scrotum split, and two ends on each side for the thighs, and all the ties should be adjusted in the waistband of the underwear.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are treated artificially with cautery at the incision site using iron; and it is that you take a thin cautery knife, make an incision in the vaginal wall, ignite it as recommended until the white bladder containing the water is discovered, and then take cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Approach and puncture that bladder, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Approach and spread the bladder with stitches, excise it with stitches, excise it with a thin cautery that is ignited; incise it as feasible until you remove everything; and be careful of the water so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You should know that this operation is safe and long-lasting without bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	However, if you encounter an abscess in the incision or cauterization time, or bleeding, it is necessary that you treat the problem that is causing it as appropriate according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	However, if the patient is weak and does not expect the second operation due to its horrible nature, you should administer puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain that, according to what has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	It is necessary that you place the patient on some raised platform, approach and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of it with a thin cannula, and stop the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	The incision should be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Place your hand over the area and press it down, leaving it there, to let the remaining water drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Take care of the wound until it heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	However, if the contrariety is due to the influx of water at that time you perform puncture: and this should not be done unless the white panniculus in the wound opening causes contrariety and prevents the discharge of water, then it is necessary for you to place a pen or instrument in the wound to extract the water from the edema, whose shape is as follows; or adjust on the pressure of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You should know that the water returns after about two months or even earlier, and when it accumulates, it is necessary to perform puncture again in that manner, because the patient will go through their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 13.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision for fatty hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the incision of this hernia there is great danger, and so I consider its abandonment and being saved by another method to be more advantageous.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation for that and the signs of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses arise in the bodies where the genitals are composed and it is made for various reasons: either due to acute sharp excess, which is poured into the genitals, or due to injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A large boil is an abscess, whose color is dark, and it does not open by itself.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some swellings are caused by the knotting of the arteries and inflammation of those same ones, as the memory of it is perceived, or inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is due to inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it is pressed with fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein cannot be dispersed by any means due to pressure with fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type surgery may be performed and on other flesh; and you should make an incision in the genitals, place your fingers at the junctions above, and extract that from the white cavity, and release the suspenders of the vessels, tie them up, and make an incision where you have released it from all parts of the junction of the fingers.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the cavity is already consolidated with those flesh parts, you must then extract the cavity and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the cavity, or between the vessels, you must then release all that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is native flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, you must then incise all that which is there and extract the cavity as previously stated.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and take care of it with other care until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of a hernia that is acute.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Acute abscess is an abscess enveloped by some envelop like a bulb with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, it is done out of fear of what precedes the memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, you must perform the operation as the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Say that you must lay the patient on a raised couch; and spread the suspenders of the testicles at the junctions below; and hold the genitals with your fingers at the buttocks which are proven in the anus; and have another minister who helps you, and stretch them out with vigorous extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And spread apart with a sharp, pointed scalpel in a crosswise section through the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all parts as you said in the removal of the artery, which are on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert an awl with a double point into those places where the abscess occurs, and let one of them go through the first place where it occurs, and let the other swelling pass through the other end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those places in the middle with a right section according to the length of the body and extract what is accumulated of foul and corrupted moisture.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with care of other wounds where it is desired that vessels not be generated, since only one testicle should not be harmed.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the abscess occurs in all the buttocks, you must then extract the testicles or make them blind to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition by the incision of the vessels, and made immobile, or make them blind so that they are not helpful for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia is due to a section that extends in the cavity extended over the abdomen from the sides of the mirror of the abdomen, so that the intestines protrude through one of its junctions.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the cavity or of the extension of it, and this happens due to various causes: impact, sneezing, shouting, lifting a heavy load, or something similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cavity, is that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not occur suddenly, and it becomes an abscess in the groin because the cavity presses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to a section of the cavity, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and the abscess appears different from the proximate apparent one, and that is precisely the intestine, and the body of it outside the junction of the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some occurrences of hernias involving the intestine are forgotten without the tissue, and this type of internal hernia is called "zirbal."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some times it is caused by wind, and some times it occurs when the hernia splits open and remains unnoticed, causing grave danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and painful complications, especially when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this disease with spices, caution must be exercised to avoid the danger of poisoning in the process.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of operating on that hernia is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity using their own hands until it returns, and then wrap a cloth around it between their buttocks, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tie the cord that secures the scrotum at the opening, and cut through the entire scrotum; and then insert two fingers into the incision to divide the scrotum as needed.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the division of the scrotum is according to the quantity that you can comfortably avoid leaving any part unattended.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then excise the tissue that is left behind after removing the scrotum, until the white hard mass of each division is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the opening that exposes the white mass left behind from the scrotum, between the masses, and remove any adhesion in the area behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then wrap the cord around the testicles at their openings, and with your left hand remove the white mass from each, and lift the testicle along with the white mass to the incision site; and command the assistant to stretch out the testicle beyond it, and you dissolve the adhesion behind it using a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Search for any signs that there may not be a cause for the hernia being wrapped in the hard white mass.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find a cause, then push it back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a thick thread of six strands, and insert it into the lower part of the white mass, which is below the cord, and the incision; and then cut the ends that protrude from the thread to about four strands, and knot them together in a cross-like fashion; and bind the white mass that we mentioned was left behind from the scrotum with strong stitches of two threads.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and bind them tightly with strong stitches, to prevent any wound infection from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	After a three-day waiting period, remove the second stitch as well; and leave a gap for the white mass that was left behind from the scrotum equal to the size of your finger, and cut out any remaining tissue around it in a circular shape, and leave the testicle alone.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision on the remaining part of the scrotum where pus and blood will flow as we previously recommended.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and wait; then apply the recommended stitches (and sometimes the white mass is cauterized, which we mentioned earlier to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs), and leave the stitch until it falls out on its own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the danger persists, boil some water and soak a cloth in it, then apply it to the wound until it falls off as we previously said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the wound with other methods for treating wounds until it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernias (Wind-related).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no known effective treatment for it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The initial treatments for this hernia were to follow the recommendations we have previously provided in treating hernias related to wind; that is, to place the instruments close to the incision with ease, and then seal the area around the wound with an ointment or other appropriate dressing until the wound heals and the instruments fall out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the wound as we previously said until it heals.
Capitol .lxvii.	Title. LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the rupture that occurs in hernias.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes ruptures occur in hernias as we have said, and it is worth noting the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not tell the genitals any cause for hernias to the genitals; and if they do, it is rare; and it always returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged without it, a fissure should be made in the cavity before the hernia appears in the cavity; and this occurs due to the extension of the cavity which is in hernias as we have said, which causes the cavity to be stretched out, softened, and the location exposed, and it becomes enlarged.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with a cautery as previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and the patient lies on their back with your hands holding them, and the location of the rupture of the hernia is dried up by pressing on it with a press of three fingers' width in its length.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And tightly hold the white cavity below the navel until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And grasp the rod and place it on the prominent part of the cavity, and press it against the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And close the two prominent parts at the end of the rod of the cavity with stitching.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And remove the end of the rod, and do not insert it into the cavity, nor extend the hernia or any other cause as you know in the treatment of internal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that with the treatment of ulcers, and when you insert the fingers, clean it and restore the ulcer inside until it is consolidated; because the cavity contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this location, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Title. LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened by this method because the flesh between it is softened, and the care of it should be observed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who treats it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert all of the scrotum that has been softened through the natural scrotum, and sew the two labia together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if desired, cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three stitches or four, and firmly sew it.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the stitches; and treat by treatment of other ulcers until it is healed and the pus falls.
Capitol .lxix.	Title. LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I mention it here because it is relevant to this book; and the reminder of it is only necessary in two cases: one is when the doctor asks about it because he knows its treatment when it occurs; the other reason is that we often need to perform castrations on animals for our use, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration can be done in two ways: either through tearing or by making an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the case of castration by tearing, the method for this operation is that we seize the animal by the testicles in warm water until they become softened and swollen and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then carefully take hold of them with your hand inside until they are resolved and do not appear again afterwards.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in the case of castration by incision, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the spermatic cords and make an incision on each one to about two inches deep.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then carefully remove the testicles, taking care not to damage them or the surrounding tissues.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those areas other than a thin thread, which is placed over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	The method of castration by tearing is better because it leaves less cause for the testicles to swell, thus the animal will not desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And carefully treat the wound until it heals up.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: the first is when a hole appears in the scrotum between the testicles, where there appears what resembles female labia.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes this condition also causes the testicles to expel urine from the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in females, it is a different case: where the female genitalia at the pubis resemble two testicles of a male, slightly smaller and located at the base of the penis, similar to the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three cases: two in males and one in females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to make an incision in the affected areas and to remove the excretion that comes from it, and then treat those areas with other remedies for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second case of males, where urine comes from the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Lengthening and Swelling due to Female Causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lengthening is a natural process that occurs when the vagina is stretched and becomes larger, following the natural regimen; but in some women it becomes exaggerated to such an extent that it spreads out like in men and enters the uterus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary to remove the excess of lengthening with your hand or a syringe and make an incision.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not deepen the incision, especially near the cervix, to avoid bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And treat that area with remedies until it heals up.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	However, swelling is the flesh that grows within the abdomen of the mother before delivery, and it extends outward near the vaginal opening, similar to lengthening (and for this reason some people call it "postpartum disease"); therefore, it is necessary to make an incision in the same way as we do with lengthening, and treat it until it heals up.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of Ulcers (or sores).
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	An ulcer is when the female genitalia is not pierced or torn in some way.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is when the ulcer has previously been caused by disease, and that can be due to excess flesh or thin or thick thread.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused either in the mother's perineum, her costal area, or the superficial or deep pus, and it is forbidden to have sexual intercourse, to engage in pregnancy, and to menstruate, and it is also forbidden to menstruate.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of the ulcer is done by the midwife, if the opening is visible, it should be sewn up with silk thread or ray; but if it is not visible, you should search for it with your fingers or with the rod (a medical instrument).
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is due to thin thread and is close to the two labia, you should catch it and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on both labia and indicate which one is the most swollen first.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be in the same position, with her legs apart and extended, and gently pull both labia until the thin thread is torn and the opening is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Apply wool, soak it in oil and place it on the affected area, and change it daily to ensure that the wound does not heal prematurely.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the boil is large and swollen, then you must lance it with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the abscess is caused by an ulcerated wound, suspend it with an ointment, and then lance it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And here are the medicines that stop bleeding without cutting, such as henbane, dragon's blood, and mastic resin, mixed with white wax.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a large leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and apply hot compresses to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then let it heal naturally with the other methods of treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes it happens during childbirth for other women's flesh, and then you must lance it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is an abscess with cancerous growths in the womb, do not oppose it with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red botches that occur in the woman's cone (vagina).
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized by the openings of many veins from which blood continuously flows, and long-standing hemorrhoids are usually fibrotic (hardened).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained the species and signs of those (hemorrhoids and piles), and I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles inside the cervix (womb) that are not felt through sensation should not be treated with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifices of the womb where you can feel them are the ones that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	You must place the woman in greater heat and hold her thigh apart with a hot iron or sharp cloth, and cut through those areas with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then powder over those areas the flow of blood from one of the crushing powders without biting, similar to ashes and resembling those (similar items).
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the bleeding continues, then make a decoction of sumac, coriander seeds, garlic and similar herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine, make a paste with water and apply it to the affected area.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, that's good; if not, make it adhere with two forceps, and scarify the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or arnica or elderberry and wine vinegar, then apply it to the affected area to promote healing.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the hernia is hard to see because of the patient's position, you must cut through that area according to what I have previously said.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV (74)
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an episiotomy in a woman.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many types of postpartum abscesses can occur in a woman, such as pus-filled abscesses, cancerous tumors, ulcers, hernias, epitheliomas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have previously discussed these illnesses and the species of each as well as their signs and remedies in the appropriate sections.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I explain in this treatise the cautery for postpartum abscesses when they are accompanied by pus, and if you want to know how the operation is performed using iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with beating and throbbing and fever, and if it swells and if pus forms on it, do not cut into it (perforare), but instead treat it with a solution that promotes maturation until the symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make an incision in the woman on a cutting board with two cutting boards; she should lie down on her back and adjust her feet beyond the abdomen, and her thighs should be spread apart, and her arms should be placed below her elbows, with each one at its appropriate position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Approach the midwife following the straight path and administer the instruments with which to open the mother's orifices, the shape of which will come according to those cases that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	It is necessary when administering this instrument that you insert it in the woman's vagina, and whatever part of the instrument goes into the woman should not be more than her vagina and the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than her vagina, then it is necessary to place powder on the texture of the woman's vagina to prevent any instrument from entering the woman's vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	It is necessary that the worker adds a lubricant to the instrument of the birth-knife and the person administering it should turn it until it is inserted into the mother's orifices.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the head of the child appears, it should be seized with the hand and pulled out by the scalp, then it is necessary to cut its nape with a linen cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the afterbirth is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a compress soaked in rose oil or other oil with some stimulating properties in the incision on the woman's perineum. And place the calica (cloth used for delivery) in the section in the woman's vagina.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Cover the mother and place a pure linen cloth soaked in boiled water containing malva herb on top of the loins (lower back).
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And have it treated for approximately two days with a warm poultice, which is appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	After some time, the mother and the wound are washed with water and honey, and over it is applied water in which are boiled radish or long-term arista (materia medica), and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound inside the mother is swollen, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, having care for it as has been said in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur according to the figure not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize in the beginning the figure of natural conception by signs of it, and when you see the woman expel at childbirth and desire to smell the air, and above it is shaved what is on her, and the infant is hastened, then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the infant's head comes out first, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen be pressed so that the infant descends gently, because when it comes out on its head, the second one follows, and it is cleaned of those excesses with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But the one who is born with this non-natural and unlawful birth is not worthy of life, because when the infant is expelled on its feet and its body is facing backwards towards its head and its feet are the first to come out, and one of its hands or feet. or the head and hand of the infant is born, or the belly of it, and it turns violently on its neck, and similar to the figures of the unlawful births.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these cases, and avoid error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And we will show the entire figure of these, and what method is in them so that it may be understood and stand on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the delivery is expelled facing forward naturally, and it is violent on the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes its power has already weakened, then do the following: either have the woman sit or use a squatting stool, and evaporate the condensation of it with fennel oil and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife places a narrow spatula between her teeth and cuts the second infant, or cuts it with her nails into it until the moisture in it escapes.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that the foot is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be shaved with chicken feathers and fennel mucilage with scissors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And call it out loudly, have it shaved, and press it so that it vomits with a cloth; hold its mouth and nose with one hand for an hour, because the infant will soon be forgotten if not done so quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the infant are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce them with gentle force little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not enter, then the woman lies on a stool and raises her feet above it, and have the stool pressed down on the ground, and the woman should be held so that she does not fall backwards.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not turned inside out and the infant dies, then cut them and remove the rotten part of the infant or pull the body with a cloth and remove it equally, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The birth of the infant on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the infant is born on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards, and turn the infant small, and hold the head and stretch the legs little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But since he is inside the thighs, you command him to express himself, and make him strain as if he were defecating, because it will be forgotten if God so wishes.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if what has been recommended is not forgotten, you return the stool little by little inside, until the second figure (or position) occurs naturally, because it will be easily forgotten then.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if everything that has been recommended is prohibited, you take alum and dissolved beeswax, grind them thoroughly in a mortar, and apply the mixture to the woman's womb, near the bottom of her stomach.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then you place that cyst in cold water until the hypogridium (or pubic bone) is found.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts left of him are softened, you perform subfumigation with myrtle and allow it to rest on him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the subfumigation lasts for an hour, you then place it on a dish and make it vomit, open its mouth, and remove it, and press gently on the lower part of the woman's stomach with light compression, because it will be forgotten quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Immediately after the procedure on his arms and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the procedure is performed in this manner, you then insert your fingers into his anus little by little; and place the woman on her back, let his feet hang down, and place a cloth under him, and cover his genitals.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on his stomach little by little, and extract what is left in the feet of him from the anus until it is prepared in the rectum below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the procedure is not forgotten, you take his feet and massage them vigorously, and then gently press on the pubic bone little by little until it penetrates into the rectum above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your fingers and gently guide the stool out little by little, and command the woman to defecate until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Immediately after the procedure, the patient should be kept on one side.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce the swelling of his arm, but if that cannot be done, raise the woman and make her urinate.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if urinating is not possible, lay the patient on his side and shake his thighs with violent shaking, and administer the medicines that I and have recommended for mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has begun, you should place the woman on a dish and study the reduction of her arm, gently guide the fetus according to its natural position, make her vomit, and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Immediately after the procedure, place the woman on her back, spread her legs apart, and open the passageway of her pelvis (or vagina) to the size of her mother's thighs.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the baby's arm and gently turn it little by little, and that she do so with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it has been turned and what needs to be done is completed, pause on the area of his head that we have recommended with oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the woman to push little by little, and when you have felt that she has done so, place the dish beneath it and command her to be inclined towards the right side, and then command her to compress herself; and make her vomit with care.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Delivery of the fetus is prepared on the side (or "delivering the baby on its side").
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When someone is suffering from abscess of the mother (mastitis) according to this method, consider, and then you shall incise the second nipple with your nail until it is drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the patient is suspended by the face and neck, then you shall incise the umbilicus to prevent it from becoming trapped and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then move the patient to the birth canal (bed) until you stop the bleeding, and order the woman to hold her breath a few times, and the wound will heal quickly if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins born in quick succession are rare and sometimes triplets or even four, but this is strange and difficult to predict; however, it is due to nature and not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Tell the mother who has given birth to twins (or multiples), even if there are more than two, that one of them will be separated by cesarean section, distinguish between the infants at the umbilicus of each, and sometimes a delivery may occur naturally quickly and easily, and sometimes it may require an unavoidable cesarean section as we have advised.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult to deliver any of them, and you reach what we have said about unnatural births, then care for them as we have advised.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mother is skillful and knows how to facilitate and expedite delivery, as well as slow it down when necessary, she must be ingenious according to every figure as she has been prepared by the art of medicine leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some weeks are composed of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten and more days. However, it is essential to confirm that a woman has given birth after five or more weeks, and another after twelve months, which was determined by the measurements of the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this concerns the knowledge of the midwife, for she must be careful with what appears similar to that (pre-eclampsia or pregnancy complications), and act accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of a dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus according to what we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet been extruded, and you must use force, then you must consider if the woman is of good health and is not one of those in whom danger is feared due to certain accidents.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then you must position the woman on her left side with her head tilted down and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister shall hold her from both sides or bind her on her left side to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you shall moisten the mouth of the womb with oils, aloe vera, fennel seed and other herbs.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then you shall anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mucilages, and insert her hand into the womb with ease, and then place her fingers in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And suitable places in him are as follows: consider if the head is to be treated, then fix the uncus (instrument) in the temples of it, or at the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the furcula (clavicle), or in the places proper to the ribs, or under the hypochondriac region.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is to be treated on his feet, then in the metatarsal or mid-ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	The uncus must be held with the right hand, bending its curve at the location between the fingers of the left hand and inserting the hand easily into it, and pushing the uncus into one of those places mentioned earlier until reaching the affected part.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Place another uncus or the third one if necessary near it to draw in and prevent its extension only along its straight direction.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Ensure that it is good on all sides, so that the pain is relieved as much as possible like in tooth extraction during removal of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in the place that is between them, the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary to anoint some uncus with oil and insert them skillfully and rotate them against what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the affected part is forgotten, the uncus should be pressed into the place that is deeper inside; do this until all the affected part is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is outside the other, and it cannot be reduced by compression, then it must be wrapped; extract it until all of it is expelled, and make an incision either in the joint or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the affected part is large or it has compression in the pain, or water is collected at the head, then insert between the fingers sponges soaked in spinous herbs and cut open the head and drain the water, or else open it with an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will be similar to those of other instruments as described in the following section.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Do the same if the affected part is naturally large: then make an incision with a scalpel or open it with the instrument described earlier; and carefully remove the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is swollen and compressed at the clavicle, then make an incision to drain the moisture in the feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated or swollen due to obesity, then make an incision on the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdominal wound is purulent or liquid, then it is necessary to make a hole in it until the moisture within is drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the affected part is on his feet, then the pull of it is light and the direction to the mother's mouth is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed in the abdomen and feet, then you must extract it with a cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the abdomen and feet until the moisture within runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are lost and the head remains, then insert the left hand; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, insert the right hand into her vagina, seek out the head, draw it with the fingers towards the mother's mouth, and carefully introduce an uncus or two into it and pull on them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is blocked by an abscess caused by ulceration, then do not press on it; instead, apply moist oily solutions.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply poultices; and follow the patient in warm baths that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the affected part is on his side, then if possible, lance it; and apply what was said in the previous section about a living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, make an incision in pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Ensure that no cause remains inside the second one (the fetus).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, administer what was said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the womb who was dead, and on top of that fire another woman observed, and that woman was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A pustule appeared on the man for a long time in his navel; it swelled until a burning sensation was felt, and blood began to flow.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied plasters with strong attraction and extracted a bone from it, and after several days, another bone was extracted; and I was greatly amazed, as there are no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore you compress the wound, and extract from it any small bones that may be present in its position within the bladder, as it has been living in such a manner for a long time, cure it with a splint of wood.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should not be surprised if it seems strange, for in this knowledge and help the physician applies his hand to treat it.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the types of instruments that are necessary to remove the object.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	A form of a hook, which is used to open the vein:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a tourniquet in which the limbs are bound, at which binding there are two advantages at each end of two straps.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this advantage must be as thin as a tourniquet, and made of yew or willow wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each stick should be double its width and the edge of both should be one digit, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick, which are already fastened, the length of which is slightly more than the length of one palm, and the width of each is double digits, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the vein so that it may be opened with the prescribed advantages when you twist the two previously mentioned advantages.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form resembling that which is thinner and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of yew or willow wood, similar to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at its end there should be two adjustments such as often happens, and the length of these adjustments is one palm, and the width of each is double digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the vein, then you should press the woman on the sides so that her legs are hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And approach with your hand using the tool similar to forceps, tightening it according to the size of the vein's mouth that you want to enter up to where you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of a hook which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of a ramming tool with which you push the object:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of an amputator with which the large head is crushed:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, as sometimes happens, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, as sometimes happens, with teeth like those of a rasp, with which it is incised and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	A form of an amputator in small size:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	A form of a probe with a single thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	A form of a probe with two thorns:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with shears at the end, with which the head of the object is crushed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of a spatula with two ends, with which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments must be practiced, and when they are multiplied and the types of each are increased and prepared, the physician should choose the one that is lighter in operation and easier for the patient to use.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay with any of these instruments, because the need for them is not excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the stone (kidney stone).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the stone is retained, you must command the patient to empty their bladder, and then make her vomit with conditioning, and press your hand on the mouth of it and on its nose, and if by this means it comes out from outside, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cup and perforate its cover with a hole and place the following herbs inside it: calmant, ruda, anethum, camomile, arabic scissors, cassia wood, and saint-john's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the cup and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And approach a glass tube in the mouth of the vein and hold it inside until the steam reaches the cavity of the vein.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make her vomit as we have said, and the stone will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	However, if this treatment remains and the stone does not come out, command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sage or mustard seeds, and approach it to the stomach and try to find the stone there, and when you have found it, take it out a little at a time. But if it is attached to the bladder, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the stone, extract it gently so that the bladder does not contract violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	The abdomen must be tightly bound on the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then it should be adjusted in amount of tightness, so that it obeys and escapes from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the mother is narrowed, we have already recommended the cure through vomiting and with oil and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if none of the causes that have been recommended are forgotten, then you must be careful not to overdo the extraction from her, but rather it is necessary that what has come out of her into the mouth of the mother should be placed in the female's cavity and covered with salve and a four-fold medication; for this will make her swell for about three days, then dissolve, and disappear.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when she swells, the evil authority rises to the head and stomach, and afflicts the patient; therefore, something should be administered under fumigation and in accordance with this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But one of the ancients has already spoken of a fumigation of garlic and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated should have the ability to retain menstruation and afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or of earth.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Then let the narrow part be placed in the cavity and the wide part above the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let it contain within itself that which is consumed by the fumigation, and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for the anus of the unborn child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn infants and their anuses that are not perforated, which are soft and open.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife must perforate the soft and open anus with a pointed instrument; otherwise, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula and ensure that she does not touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then cover it with wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with salve inside until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may open again, then cover it with a tube for several days, and remove it when the child wants to relieve itself.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And there often occurs obstruction of the anus due to consolidation of a wound or abscess; therefore, that consolidation must be incised and treated with what has been said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistulas that have descended.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that descend into the descents are often thick and swollen, which occur near the anus or in the space of one of the descents.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when the thickening is old and turns from the foul, white moisture or subtle pus, some of these fistulas may penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are recognized by what is expelled from them through the opening and by swelling; some patients also experience expulsion, and often worms come out of these.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas often penetrate into the space, penetrating into the bladder and into the meat of the scrotum; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you insert your pointed instrument into the anus, and make a small incision in the fistula when there is no hardness.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is hardness in that, then make a small incision with lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the incision or the hair in your instrument.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of this or do not experience any cause of expulsion, worms, or swelling, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating and you can proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the scrotum, its meaning is indeed of urine from that place and it should be forbidden until the location has been properly treated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the hernia penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and pain occurs in the vicinity, this is a sign that it will enter here if there is no treachery inside the bone, and pain in the vicinity of the injured area; that pus will appear quickly; that such treatment has no effect, nor can it be healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all such fistulas there is not a cure, and the cure of these is the labor and futility of foolish doctors on which they are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I shall advise you, and what I have tested.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	It is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their legs into the air, so that their hips are inclined towards their belly, and carefully insert a probe of lead or of iron if there is treachery in the fistula, until you know where it enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the probe already penetrating by itself, then what you should do is to insert your finger between the probe and that tissue or flesh, and then you will know with certainty that it is penetrating; and at that point, do not work on it, for there is no healing in that place, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But others say that it heals in some men temporarily.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which healing is hoped for in that place, it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously described, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then return it two or three times until you know that all the tissues adjusted by the fistula, which resemble the feather of a bird's quill, have been cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And cure that one with calves wrapped in bandages until they heal all the tissues that are adjusted, and cure that one with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, do not attempt healing by another method for a time.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe is inside, but does not penetrate into your rectum, which is covered with a membrane or with flesh, and sometimes the fistula is in that which dries up the surface of the scrotum, then you should dry the scrotum from the beginning of the fistula, and see if it dries up with the probe, and it should be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the tip of the probe emerges, and through the probe is freed and captured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And cure those fistulated tissues that are similar to the canal of a bird's feather and leave no cause remaining in them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if blood flow sometimes comes between you and your action when you handle those tissues, then prepare a poultice and with a light instrument, cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adhesion of those tissues adjusted, and the abscess draining of the blood through drying of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cure that one with calves wrapped in bandages or with crushed charcoal until the wound breaks open, and then cure the ulcer with hard-generated flesh ointment.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have astringency and drying properties; when it is restored, it is healed and there will be no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if the probe is covered with flesh or with tissue and is near penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but rather through trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as previously described; or to dry it until you achieve the concavity of the place so that it is possible for you to enter and cure it properly without tearing the ligament that contains the rectum, and be careful not to do so much drying that you tear the skin, and it may happen to the patient painlessly, without their will; or to elongate that covering and clean the pus that is dried near the rectum as previously described, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, and to clean those fistulated tissues in the area where you can do percrustation; and to force yourself to restore the entire ulcer through drying, and if the opening of the pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the lower part of the rectum, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the rectum near the surface of the body with the scrotum, and on the edge of the rectum, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is similar to an awl for preparing the body as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And enter into that faithful envelope of your five fields or around them; and carefully enter the fistula, try to reach its cavity until you succeed.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If penetrating into the margin of the anus is done, then you extract the fistula from that hole and insert your finger into the anus; draw out the tip of the fistula and adjust both ends symmetrically, tighten each one, and leave them for a day or two, and when the fistula goes deeper into the flesh, tighten it in as far as those fleshy areas are incised which are between the two ends of the fistula and where they join.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then you make them penetrate, in whatever way is prepared by you, but it must not be too deep, because it is not for you to do this so as not to injure the lacert; and carefully heal that into which it has been healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of spine splint for the splitting of the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not penetrate unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching hemorrhoids from which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for they can be like coal in the anus, or those are like fat from radishes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those can be small and large, and blood flows from them constantly, and they are single, and they are moist, and they protrude out of the anus, and at their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that protrude out of the anus are according to the dry months, from which clear water or a little blood with continuous flow comes, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the healing of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and express until the anus dries up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of it with some tweezers or what you have those with your nail, and carefully cut the roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the tweezers are not available for those due to their humidity and softening of those, then take those with rough cloth or thread or woolen floss, and draw those out with your fingers, and carefully cut them and sprinkle some powdered herbs appropriate for cauterization at the incision, so that they are in place of cautery; or cauterize those as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then heal those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obstruct evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite in the area of the anus that should be moistened slightly, and the patient should gently press when necessary.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause of them is slight, and you should take those with your nail or tweezers, cut them, and heal them as I said earlier until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The one that you should incise, it is necessary to administer stitching of them according to this method: take the fistula and insert the needle into it and carefully draw out the hemorrhoids to the top, and make the needle penetrate through the other part, and envelop the two ends of the fistula on the side further away from the needle, lengthwise; and tie the hemorrhoid tightly, and do not bind the fistula and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, leaving one loose and not sewing it up, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Place a cushion on the anus with oil-soaked cotton or wax, and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Leave it until it is healed; when it is healed, heal those with salve or the other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Multiple cysts may occur due to drying of a wound or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and of no value in that medicine, it is necessary that you cut those with the point of a splint or your nail until they become moist and are prevented from consolidation; and heal those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then remove those with the most violent reason, before they become dry and are scabbed over; and heal those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of anal fissures, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that anal fistula is essential and not to be ignored regardless of the color of the skin resembling a clove head, it occurs throughout the body but more frequently in the lower parts of the body and the legs, and in these areas pain should be expected.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is around the nail and hold it with forceps or tweezers and be rooted out from its root; and heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, cauterize the following that is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small rough, round elevation on the surface of the body, and it is observed in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for a wart is to extend and incise it, or to press it with a hot iron or with something that goes into the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you want, cauterize this, as I said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	Warts, whether they are facing outwards or inwards, have been eradicated using the tool that I shall mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A bedbug is a small rough or large elevation on the surface of the body which moves around in the skin, and when it is touched, it feels like a bite from a bedbug, and it is found all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for a bedbug is to take a thin or blunt needle, and it should be strong, and place it on the bedbug inside its circle; then rotate your hand with the needle around the bedbug that you have enclosed within its circumference, and press it in the skin of the body, and eradicate the bedbug from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want, do this with an iron rod or with a needle as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the handle should be thin, blunt (not piercing), wrapped so that when the handle is turned, it moves freely and rotates easily.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you want to cauterize the bedbug as mentioned in the cauterization of athlete's foot in the chapter of cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the tools that are administered for making an incision.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veguadas are made with silver or lead or iron that has been melted or hammered; and some veguadas are made of small and large tools depending on the ones that are administered, since the one administered in the treatment of young children should be small; and those for which the ends are sharp or painful, the veguadas of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and shallow incision:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should have a distinguishing mark where the bag is tied in this way, as is sometimes done.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the tip of it that is inserted in the anus should be blunt (not open), like a lion's snout, pointed but thin; and on one side there should be two slits, and on the other side one slit, and the width of the slit should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and the larger ones should have a smaller opening.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	The bag in which the urinary bladder or sheep's wool medicine is placed should be made of cowhide, and its size should be about a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	It should have holes pierced in it as it is rotated, and the size of the space between the holes should correspond to the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert it into the holes made with a pointed and sharp needle or around them; and adjust the bag to that hole; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be tight at the head of the needle between two distinguishing marks with strong pressure, and then cauterize each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Place the patient on his back, and raise his legs and place a cushion under him or a lansol; then anoint the outside of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and insert it gently into the anus with ease, and have someone administer the bag and squeeze it forcefully and repeatedly until everything that is in the cauterizer is evacuated from the intestine; then remove the cauterizer and the patient lowers his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine is not enough in that case, have more of it; and if it remains there for an entire night, it is more beneficial later.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize it in the cases of abdominal distention and its resolution, then you should continue inserting the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses that are painful, then use a thin and pointed cautery, such as those that are used for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of treating sores what is necessary for the free treatment, and I say again the treatment of those with more and with medicine according to the need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are varied according to what causes the sores and according to the area where the sores occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of sores that are often caused by injuries such as stones, incisions of space or sword, blows with a lance, fist, spear, arrows, or similar things.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	These plagues that are in the locations of the body are similar to a plague that settles on the head, neck, feet, belly, back, and are similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And you recommend the treatment of some plagues by following that reasoning and rule for other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple plagues of the head, because the composition will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when a simple plague occurs in the head, and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to stone or something similar, and the patient has already tightened the bandage only, but there is a large wound and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then quickly lance the skull and do not delay; and extract it according to the amount of strength of the blood, unless any other reason prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has come out is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And ensure that phlebotomy is done opposite the affected side, and protect the patient from replenishment, food, and heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for the minucium, then it should be reduced from food and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the plague, if an abscess has formed, apply oil of roses or wine that is steeped in it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that there is an abscess, then pause over the plague, if the patient's blood and air have not changed, apply the powder that I will recommend in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed, then pause over some salve until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is large or due to incision of space and similar things, and the lips are not properly aligned, then align them with suture as I will recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has exposed bone and cartilage without retention, but only a small suspension is used, then incise it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the skin to its place using bandages, and order the patient to eat food that is heavy and nourishing: meat and bread, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the bandage becomes putrid and does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise it all and drain it, and care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and it has not been separated by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if it is not incised, you should incise it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity compels that what has been said does not conform, then cauterize it until blood flow is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light; therefore you powder over them with this powder, because it solidifies before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: prepare an oil made from one part of camphor, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinct herbs; grind everything together and sieve it, and fill the plague with the powder, and tie it tightly with good binding until it adheres to the skin, and coagulate it with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And keep it above with powder and release it only when it is healed, because the medicine has not yet been absorbed into it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes perform this caution alone when camphor and dragon's blood are not available to you.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this method of operation on large plagues when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and on new plagues with their blood, which the air has not yet changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	But if the air has already changed, and especially in summertime, it is not intended to use this powder position, but rather care for them with what has been said, by pausing over them with some salve, or pausing over them with flour water and honey until they drain pus; and care for them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture occurs in bone, and it is small, you should extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will heal the poisonous fractures of the head.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the ailment occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and the same medicine applies for the simple fracture of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or artery in the neck have been cut, it is not advisable to treat it immediately with anything that causes violent stitching, such as ziniar and zegi (arsenic and vinegar), which are harmful to nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any ointment to the ailment that causes it to freeze, as the substance of nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the most important part of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it can be cured with light medicines such as washing it with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, thuja (Thuja occidentalis) when washed with sweet water and other herbs mixed according to this method, and gargling with moist liquid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the ailment is large, administer a stitch or sew the lips of it, and apply care with powder until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the ailment has depth or occurs in the lower part of the pustule, then pierce it at its most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has already been cut in the ailment and bleeding occurs, then separate it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the cervical spine have already been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the skin around the cervical spine with sutures on the spinal canal, without touching it; bend it to its natural shape, strengthen it with a suitable structure, and leave it for several days; apply care with astringents to reduce swelling and inflammation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then you should percuss it and if there are any fragments of bones, remove all that can be removed; and let what cannot be handled go in so that the wound may heal, and it should be separated and the swelling around it should be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then you should sprinkle that powder which has been recommended over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound becomes a fistula, you should treat it with what will come to mind in its appropriate chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar ones when it is caused between the shoulders and is made with a sword, a knife, a spear, or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the wound is from a lance or sword, and sometimes of great depth, you should consider whether there is wind coming from the wound if the patient complains about it; in this case, you should know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no great depth in the wound and it is fresh with blood, you should wait for the first hour before applying powder, and avoid pressing too hard so as not to hold back the blood in the depth of the wound and allow it to return to the heart and alleviate the patient, but apply an attractive ointment to it, and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if there is no ointment available, you should wait for the orifice of the wound to become caked with old scab so that it may draw out the humidity; and have the patient sleep on the wound so that it may run what is in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the patient has not experienced spasm, palpitations of the heart, tremors, or any other good conditions, you should know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with heat and other treatments until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed and it is always open, you should know that a fistula has formed; treat it according to its appropriate chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a sword or knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, you should treat it with sutures if it is large, or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone and there are separate pieces of bone, you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the pieces of bone are not separated, you should let them go in so that the wound may heal and the removal of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And the treatment for other accidental wounds in other parts of the body is the same as that which has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition of the abdomen that occurs can be large, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In large wounds, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine protrudes, requiring careful and precise insertion and suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Small disruptions are made with difficulty by another means, and it is known that the reduction of them is difficult if you do not take care to insert them into their proper place immediately, for it becomes swollen and thickened, making the insertion of them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is medium-sized, because in this case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with the two types mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these are common and necessary for suturing other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	The remaining two sutures are specific to other wounds, but they are particularly suitable for the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that you have exposure and dissection at your disposal.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and it has caused the intestine to protrude through it, making reduction difficult, you should do one of two things: either because of the smallness of the disruption as mentioned before, or when inflammation has come upon the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when that is the case, you should warm the intestine by placing a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or by putting it in warm water, camphor, cinnamon, and bandages around it to resolve the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you will find that it has stiffness, and water alone is better for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when inflammation is resolved, you should moisten the intestine with water that contains salt and pepper, as this helps to alleviate the difficulty of insertion.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if insertion is difficult despite this treatment, you should make a small incision with an instrument and then remove the morbid matter.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better if it is not dry and there is no need to let it dry out due to necessity or negligence.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, cut its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The first part should be curved and sharp, the second part should not be pointed but rounded, the end should be fine, but not as thin as a needle point, it should be blunt to a small degree.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And since the wound is expanded and the intestine has come out, it is necessary to reduce it in its natural form, in its own proper place if possible, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the injury is widespread and located at the lower abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs as high as possible; if it is above the abdomen, you must raise the head of the patient and their feet to the same level as the injured area.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the injury is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you must immediately focus and decide which side the wound is on so that the other side may be raised higher.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	You must also treat large wounds and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small wounds, you should prepare what is needed, and make sure the assistant who will minister to the wound has it ready in your presence, holding the entire wound with their hand and adjusting the edges of it, and then carefully expose one part at a time for suturing, ensuring that no other obstacle interferes.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing method: take a needle or a large needle depending on the size of the wound; position it at the edge of the wound on the anular finger's tip and pull the needle through once, without piercing both ends of the thread, near the inside edges of the skin folds, until it penetrates that area; you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then pull the thread through twice around the needle, and several times in both areas, and draw together the two edges and the wound by a proper suturing; then position the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, pulling it along with the first needle as before; do not stop until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, because thin needles penetrate the flesh lightly; while thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be moderately thin and thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should not be inserted too deep into the adjacent skin, so that the flesh is not pierced lightly and the wound does not burst before it heals.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Do not prolong the suturing so that the wound does not hinder healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Draw the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient during their sleep and place a powder over the suture, covering all areas, which will hold the tips of the needles; leave it in place until you know that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	This method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it covers the suture with only one or two needles around it.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second suturing method is common: you must administer four corners (two from the skin and two from the suture) in one go with a needle that is tightly wrapped in both thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle penetrates these four corners, retract the needle from that side of the starting area, to draw back the purulent material from the wound to the healthy part, so that the suture is like a sewn fabric where the cloth is strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Stop between each stitch the thickness of the finger tip.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	I sewed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who had been stabbed with a sword, and the size of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was located near two palms from the belly button of the middle part of the member; and after waiting for 24 hours for the intestine to come out of the wound, I reduced it.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed in the space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he recovered; and he lived for many years and remained in his normal condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and by a miracle, because I did not cure him with poultices, because there was no poultice or any medicine in that area, instead I placed cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it repeatedly with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	However, I will describe two types of suturing as narrated in the word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	You should start with skin suturing, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the abdomen and in that place it is placed the thread according to the rule and in length of the entire body, leaving the end of the cipher where the needle was inserted; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from the inner part at the inner end of the hernia to the outer end of the incision on the other side of the midline.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus, as you have inserted it there, make it pass again through the other end of the hernia from the inner side to the outer side; and leave the end of the cipher that is in this location, and insert the needle in the other end of the incision from the inner side to the outer side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Make your insertion pass through the hernia with which you have inserted into the abdomen, until it reaches the other side of the incision.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And bring it together from this side and connect the other end with the one in the abdomen that was penetrated, extract the needle from the hernia that was penetrated, return it to the abdomen, connect the other end of the hernia with the other incision, and remove that one from the abdomen.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Make it pass again and again, and make it pass again and again inside until you sew everything that is on the outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing method is that you sew with a skin suture, the same one used to sew skins, unless you sew the hernia once from the side of the abdomen incision, and leave the other side open until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	However, the second type of suturing, which is commonly called Guadia, and this is said because it comes from there and is recommended, is that you sew it according to half-half, as some physicians do, unless all the parts are connected in a natural way; and they apply one end of the other to the other end, and that is done as I have suggested.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You must place the needle at your side of the incision, and make it pass through to the other side only, leaving two ends of the hernia; and turn the needle around and make it pass from outside to inside in the two ends of the hernia.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn each of them around, and make each one pass from the inside to the outside in two opposite directions.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is the suturing that precedes remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the Gaulish saying.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	However, some say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert one needle in each of them and begin with the incision of the needle that is yours, and make it pass to the other side according to the suturing of those who sew the hearts together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than those of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	However, the treatment for hernia is judged as that for other hernias.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you succeed in the hernia while it is still fresh before the air changes it, and you reduce the intestine and sew it up properly, then pause over the embrocation powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the hernia, then pause over some embrocation ointments that are present among you until they become hard and bind the hernia and the incision; and cure it in this way as is the treatment for other hernias until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	However, if you are not present with the medications, then pause over it immediately, because it begins to bleed, exude pus and change twice a day as you have shown me, until it is healed, for you do not need any other treatment in many cases when hernias are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	However, if you fear that the hernia may communicate with damage to the main members, it is necessary for you to immerse linen wool in boiled oil or raw oil, and apply it in the circuit of the areas between the joints and leave it until it cools.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your hernia, which often goes unnoticed, you must sterilize it with black sticky vinegar, especially if the pus has spread in the hernia and makes an exit by penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that a large hernia heals more slowly than a small hernia.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gugunu" does not receive treatment by hernias that occur in other places; and this is due to the large number of veins present there, and the size of it which is larger in them, and the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of it to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	However, if the process of the hernia is the tissue, and you succeed in it while it is still fresh, reduce it according to your rule, as you reduce other hernias.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the patient's wound has already turned black or green, then you must apply a strong bandage on the affected area to promote bleeding, as veins and arteries are present in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then, you should cut out a piece of linen equal to the size of the wound, and fold its two ends over the edges of the incision to relieve pressure from the wound, by holding the fabric in place and allowing drainage of the pus.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering abdominal wounds:
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small rupture in the abdomen, it may be possible to restore it in some men, as I once saw one who had been stabbed in the stomach and had an old wound that turned into a fistula, with pus discharge.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, you should continue the treatment, as it was not yet complete in healing, but rather focusing on sterilizing the inside to promote heat and consolidation of the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	After the area has been consolidated, you should instruct the patient to avoid any complications from the stomach injury and maintain proper hygiene by eating and drinking well, taking baths, and resting in bed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Some experienced doctors say that when a small wound occurs in the abdomen, it is necessary to suture it using this method: you should take large breadcrumbs; and then align the edges of the wound and place one breadcrumb with its open mouth over both edges of the wound; when you press on it, remove the breadcrumb's cap, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another breadcrumb near the first one and do not stop making them, one after the other, according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return the breadcrumbs and sew up the wound; keep the attached caps inside the abdomen until the abdomen is healed, and ensure that no harm comes to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is also possible to suture the abdomen with a fine thread made from animal intestines, which is thinner than a needle; you should take the end of this thread of animal intestine and make an incision in it, then sew the end of the thread into the incision using a needle, and reduce the hernia.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of suturing with breadcrumbs is not without trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle abdomens, then it's not an operation, but rather a delicate procedure that does not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment for ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess that becomes old and chronic will turn into an ulcer, not heal properly, and will continue to discharge pus all the time without being drained, and in any part of the body it is universally called a fistula, and we call it a chronic ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Fistula, in truth, is a hardened, white nodule without pain and with a concavity similar to the concavity of an ulcer, hence it is called a chronic ulcer, meaning ulceration.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men, it is a moist fistula that discharges pus; the moisture is drained after some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture becomes thin and thick, and is both coarse and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already mentioned the divisions in my previous explanation, so when I speak of wounds, any ulcer that does not heal or is not in bare flesh is not that but rather due to one of these causes: either because there is insufficient blood in the body; or due to poisoning; or because there is tough tissue between it and the lips preventing natural regeneration of flesh; or because it is a tumor; or because the ulcer contains pus and the material transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a plague; or because the region has a property such as Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of abscesses by nature is slow; or because there is one bone, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment of them in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Therefore, you must know the treatment for fistulas that are treated by surgical intervention with a scalpel.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach veins, arteries, nerves, bladder, abdomen, kidneys, spine, joints such as the hand and foot, or the compound joints like the elbow and shoulder, and they are located near the main limb and similar parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, those fistulas that occur in this way are among the difficult-to-heal diseases and do not receive treatment or care, making them laborious and full of ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places mentioned, and you expect and hope for its healing, and wish to discover its location, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the right path, probe that with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a probe of lead, for lead being lighter than its body, it can be moved and curved to follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is filled with horrible motions, you cannot probe that with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cauterize the opening with cauteries, for the moisture that you use to cauterize there will run off from other openings and cure them as well.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And approach carefully and examine, by whatever method possible, whether you have a bone or nerve here, and determine whether the fistula is long, deep, or shallow, or is one in which there are horrible motions that lie entirely upon your strength, attention, the patient's weakness, and the discovery of the pain, and you should compress with your hand over the area, as in the case of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with certainty, then proceed to healing according to confidence: for you consider whether the fistula is apparent near salt, far from joints, or nerves, arteries, veins, one of the places that I told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You should dry the fistula as described earlier in its narrative, and remove whatever is in that filtration and rotten flesh, and whatever was born in the sores of the skin or tissue, and treat that within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long, deep depth and follows the right path, then it is necessary to incise that in the preon as far as possible, and cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have compressed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And leave that for some days until the hot poultices in the cavity of the fistula destroy all that is rotten due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And place fresh, healthy tissue over it until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and you must certify that, then you investigate that and dry it as recommended, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or major member as mentioned earlier.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and has corruption and blackness there, you remove it until all the corruption is stopped; and treat that with fresh flesh until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and oozes pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, investigate again carefully and treat the reason for it and cleanse it with the last of your strength, and place fresh tissue over it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, good; and if not, then you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is no remedy but to let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the rotten bone is small or can be pulled out, then you pull it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is moving bones, then you extract all of them carefully, and do not leave any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the moistures opposes you, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then you incise those fluids or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then pause over the wound that could become infected, and leave that until the environment of those bones is filled with flesh and fluids, and guard the wound so it does not consolidate, and constrain the incision you made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Moreover, if you are afraid, pause over the wound covered in mustard oil, or a wound covered in strong Egyptian ointment, or one of the greenish poultices, for when those liquids boil, the bones will be separated from their abscesses, and the attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the hip bone or thigh bone, or similar to those, and what is rotten is only its face, then scrape that with resin only backwards until the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is rotten is a large part of the bone, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it becomes necessary to completely close that area and cut through it into the location where the corruption has been reached, and then treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which can happen to a man in his thigh, to keep it immobile and supportive during your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Find a young man about 30 years old, in whom pain occurs in the groin, and from within the limbs there is a bad condition on the matter within the body that reaches the groin, and it is matter of an abscess with large abscess, and it is not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore it is necessary to wait a long time with that one due to the error of doctors until the abscess has healed, and bring materials for moths, and his healing should be prevented until the hernia becomes fistulized, and make them in the moth-infested holes which all got pus and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the patient was cured by many doctors for about two years, not with knowledge but with skill, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the hernia of him and the matter that ran from those holes through a large opening, and the body of that man was completely stabilized and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I entered the wound into one of those holes and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the holes and found them coming from all parts of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I took a scalpel and cut into one of those holes until I discovered a piece of the bone, and found it rotten, muddy and decayed; and already there was a part of the hernia that had penetrated deep into the muscle layer.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I carefully removed the rotten and prepared piece of the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I recognized that it was not in the bone but the corruption that had abscessed and I removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I placed the wound dressing with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I continued to probe and discover the bone a second time on the initial discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed that which appeared from the corruption, and then I was determined to perform the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I continued to examine it and did not stop cutting the bone little by little particularly and performing the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut around one palm-width, and that extracted with the marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	There was no need for further examination or cutting of the operation on him and the separation of it except for the care of his weakness and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he had happened at all times due to excessive syncopal malfunctions.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore it is healed completely, and nothing remains in the bone tissue; and his condition was good within his body and restored its virtue; and it was preserved in his habits and did not do anything contrary to him in walking or any harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in any part of the body that has been fractured, then it is necessary that you cut it in this way: and it is that you hold it firmly with strong bandages at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it; and stop the bandage of wool thicker than the first bandage; and place it on the skin that is left over the bone, and extend the end of it so that the skin is stretched away from the edges, and you cut the skin at the location where you want to cut so that the skin does not get injured.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a pillow or table under the bone properly, because when you do that it is not forbidden to use the knife that does not cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the cutting be over the rotten spot little by little, because if it is in the depression of the decayed bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and perhaps it will require another examination.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not prominent, one continuous partition is joined with another, and the corruption is in some places or in parts of it, then you must cut the skin completely; and place a pillow under it, and start cutting from the first partition where the corruption is until the cutting of the second partition is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the cutting should be small according to the location of the corruption, as previously stated.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, cut the rotten joint, and cut the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but cunning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you must find the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and then cut and clean that area as possible according to each disposition available to you, and correct any problem with every device possible, as long as it does not contradict your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know what the saws and chisels are for cutting these bones according to their position, and prepare the bones themselves, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare all kinds of tools suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Here comes the next sentence:
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the next sentence:
Forma de serra:	The form of a saw is:
Forma de autra serra:	The form of another saw is:
Forma de autra serra:	The form of another saw is:
Forma de autra serra gran:	The form of another large saw is:
Forma de ray:	The form of a rule (ray) is:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The end of this rule (ray) should be in the shape of a star head, and the points at the end should be in the shape of the points of an astrolabe.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable unless the joints are compressed when they are corrupted or if the opening is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of larger knives is:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of smaller knives is:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of large blades (lathes) is:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of another saw should be made with a curve from the back up to the edge and the sharpness of the blade should descend from the front; the body of the handle should be straightly made.
Forma de lu:	The shape of it is:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of knives with a concavity is:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of other thin knives is:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another curved-tipped knives is:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Small razor-like shape resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of small bony incisors (tooth-like structures):
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of other small incision instruments:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incision instrument; this one resembling a saw and its end has the shape of a saw tooth, and it is used in various places in bone ratios:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of saw suitable for cutting holes in bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	Triangular end with sharp tip:
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	Made of Indian steel, and similar to all the causes we have mentioned about razors, incision instruments, and saws:
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For incision and bone cutting:
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can become inflamed or infected either internally or externally, or if the corruption is not treated with medication and the treatment does not work, or if the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, then you must incise that limb and cut out the corruption, so the patient can escape death or a worse fate for the affected member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of this condition is that the limb becomes black before it can be cauterized with fire, or it may become necrotic (rotten) and spread into the affected member and eventually affect the entire body; therefore, take caution and make an incision in that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous substances such as those from a sea scorpion, viper, or ratbite and similar animals.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or poison is located at the end of a finger, you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to enter your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you touch the hand, incise the wound at the wrist to prevent the corruption from entering the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it swells, incise the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads and sometimes surrounds the joint, in such a case it is the patient's death; administering another treatment at that point is of little benefit.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When the foot becomes corrupt, cut it into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If there is a swelling on the foot, then you should cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it is a boil inside the nail, then you should cut the nail at its joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has reached the nail, then it is not a matter of treatment but rather letting nature take its course and allowing the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting a member or sawing it is that you tighten the ligament on the part you want to cut, and tighten another ligament on the other side; extend one ligament at the cut site, and extend the other ligament above; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then separate it by cutting or sawing.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it must be placed cloth on all cut sites so that it does not touch the wound, and bring the wound dressing for the patient adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the area with caution, or place some stopping powder on the blood; and return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected member with cloth as appropriate, and treat that area until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if a black spot appears on a man's foot, use the remedy that I and you recommend, which is that it should be treated with mustard that is similar to fire burning.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first appeared in the patient's foot, spreading throughout the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself by putting on more medicine and going to the affected member with the intensity of pain and burning sensation, and cut off the foot at the joint, and the fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption has appeared in the hand as indicated by the master.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Then come to me, and have the excess corruption treated with what can be applied on the hand of medicines, for purification of his body; and do not let the excess spread and begin in another affected area.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do it fearing the spread of that corruption, and rather feared the amputation of his hand as death, for the patient's strength was in the hunt.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he lost hope with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared himself and cut off his whole hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This narrative has not been added except as a guide for what can be done with this illness, and as a signification that should be understood and followed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of the bladder and quality of cleansing with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	If an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until drainage of pus occurs, and it is broken and perforated, and pus is released from it, leaving a hole like a vessel, and the cloth that is above it is placed like fine fabric, and no further corruption has occurred, and it does not press on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption enters any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is that you cut open the cloth completely as it is rolled up, especially when it is made fine and sewn like fabric, and make sure that it does not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the cloth adheres and that the corruption has not occurred by further consequences, and in the cloth there is a discharge of pus, then treat it with cleansing.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus and if it is large and the odor is fetid, you should cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine that is made of oil, vinegar, and garlic juice, which are divided into pieces and placed in a vessel, and covered with fire until the medicine becomes red and boils and achieves a specific effect.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with that, and tighten its opening, and leave the medicine there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And remove it with care; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the foul smell is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And for several days it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you take the ash from vegetables, and put it in the water; and boil that and cleanse the sinus with it until you are sure that the sinus has healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, you should cleanse it with water and honey mixed with garlic juice, and cleanse it with vinegar and honey mixed, because by nature honey purifies and cleanses, and vinegar causes the sinus to adhere, and especially when there is excess stickiness and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make some observations and confirm that the sinus is flooded, then cleanse it with something that makes the flesh come out of it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is that you take defigintic oil or dissolve it with warm olive oil and white powder; or cleanse it with some medications and other remedies that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the canula of the enema, then you should gradually widen it with a small tool, and pause in places covered by Egyptian or Basilicon oil until it is fully dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, you should close it with stitches and leave a certain amount of space within the cavity to be filled by the enema.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the opening from which the arm emerges is raised at the armpit, then you should cauterize it with hot iron in the place where it needs to be lowered so that the arm can return below, because when the arm is constricted in the sinus cavity, flesh will grow there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to cauterize the sinus near the bone as you wish, then prepare the limb with the preparation required for the arm to emerge easily from it and do not allow anything to obstruct the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medications that are placed on the sinus as needed to extend them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be large enough to cover the entire sinus; then, with scissors, make an incision in the center of the sinus opening, and extend it slightly beyond the sinus opening. Then, spread other cloth soaked in Lion oil over it according to the size of the incision, and place it on top to position it a safe distance from the sinus opening to alleviate pain in the arm and not press too much on the cloth, except that you should slightly loosen it every day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	However, the one on the sinus opening should always be moistened to allow fluid to escape from the area around the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what is coming out of the arm is mucus or pus, or undigested matter.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And consider the location of the sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is extended in this manner, and you see the matter discharged from the sinus opening adhering, or bonding, then remove it or wait three days before removing the wound, and when you remove the wound, change the cloth for another and renew the oil.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if the sinus cavity is close to having subtle pustules, do not be discouraged by adherence, because healing can occur quickly, for some men have slow wound regeneration, and some have the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus cavity is not discharging undigested arm within a few days, then you should know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed, it may be due to excessive addition of ointments such as enguent dyafinicon when it becomes too dry.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the one that is more recent to be cured is that you take defigintic oil and dissolve it in warm olive oil, and add old remedies known for their antiseptic properties to it, and place it there, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	It is similar in that action when there is no arm, you can use defigintic oil, honey until it thickens, and use it; or you can take myrrh and aloes and crush them into a powder, and sprinkle it over the honey as it cooks, and line the resulting paste on a cloth and apply it to the sinus; and line the paste with the honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and sprinkle it with powder on a cloth and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you can administer it with long aristology and the reason for this heavenly substance (and it is this heavenly substance) and rye flour and centaurea, and use these simple ingredients or combine them, crush them and sieve them, then pulverize the resulting powder over the honey that has been recommended; and hold it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the sinus cavity itself, and it is necessary to make an inquiry into the bones or other hard parts of the body; then, you can cure it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment for pancreatic inflammation and finger abrasion, incision, and division of the digit.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Pancreatic inflammation is an abscess that occurs at the end of the finger of the hand or foot, and it can be serious in other cases, and if it is prolonged and its cure is costly, or if it becomes an abscess under an abscess, or is corrupted, it discharges pus into the area around the nail, which eventually corrupts the entire area, and the foul odor spreads to the bone, causing the end of the finger to rot, and the color of the affected area becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have the one with what I said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you cut all the superfluidity that is rotten from the nail and cauterize the place near it, because cautery is helpful in this matter.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, yet the additions of the nail compress the flesh at the joints inside, and they start to hurt and inflame it there, then it is necessary that you make a thin probe and place it at the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it in with ease, incise the flesh around it, and stop on what remains of the flesh with medicines that burn and corrode until it is all healed; and apply an ointment to it until it is cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will heal what is putrefied in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the said joint, then you incise it in one of the nodes according to its memory, and apply medicine to it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is driven by percussion or attrition and intense pain occurs there, then it is necessary that you first anesthetize the patient, and then cut the nail with a sharp spatula across transversely from top to bottom, taking care not to cut into the flesh beyond the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and this may lead to the growth of excess skin in that area; and apply medicine to it to relieve the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But the said joint, which is born in the majority of men, has a strong flesh, and it is strong in bone or it is strong in nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And these joints are born in the race of the joint, or their nature is in the knuckles of the said ones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But one born in the knuckles of the said does not get sick, and one born with strong joints is malicious.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those born with fleshy nature, the incision is easy, and it is that you should make an incision there with a flat spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of one born with the nature of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so beware of abscessing it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in one born with the said knuckles, it is necessary that you incise the flesh of it first with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with a suitable saw, and apply medicine to it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that occurs in the said joints between their motions observed or by nature of the man born thus, or by consolidation of ulcers or burns by fire, or by something similar, then it is necessary to cut that consolidation until they return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place them between their rags in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them, or pause between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the knuckles of the said with the palm, then you cut the consolidation according to its preparation and the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of vices, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varices, and they are swollen thick veins full of melancholic superfluidity that move in the members of the body, and the greatest danger of them is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purge of the body of black bile several times with strong evacuation, and apply bloodletting on the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: the first is that it should be incised and drawn out the black blood, and the second method is that it should be elevated and all should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of it is according to this method: first, the leg is encircled with hot water not too deep until the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent from the leg, and then the patient's thigh is strapped above the most superior part of the hip joint to the part below the knee with a bandage, and it is cut in one place, or two, or three with wide incision, and it raises the black blood with the thumb of the part below the leg upward and downward until the amount you want and what you have removed is released, and this will take away the power of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Approach her (the patient) and order her to abstain from consuming black bile-inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment by leeching when the veins are filled and the patient feels pain.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them (the legs) is done in this manner: you who are raising the patient's bed, if there are swellings in it, approach him with warm bath and wrap his leg in hot water until it softens and veins become engorged; or, if bathing is not available to you at present, apply strong exercise until the member becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Approach the affected area along the vein and make an incision in length or obliquely (across) depending on whether it is towards the thigh or the foot you must cut, or at the bottom of it, you must cut the tendon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Approach the affected area with an open incision and remove the vein from all parts until it becomes visible, and you must identify that part which, when pressed, darkens (turns black).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, cut out the white, stringy substance from the affected area.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Approach and place a ray under it (the stringy substance) until it is raised and separated from the affected area, and suspend it with a hook of lion's beak.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Approach another incision near the first one (the previous incision) for three fingers and remove the affected area above the vein until it becomes visible.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Approach and raise that (the stringy substance) and incise it in the posterior incision towards the tendon, and remove it and raise it through the second incision until it exits, and remove it from the incision above it (the previous incision).
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Do this until the stringy substance is completely removed from all incisions and exits, then make another incision in that area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you find it difficult to extract and raise (the stringy substance), then insert a strong double-pointed needle and tie it off and remove it, or place a hook under it and rotate your hand around until it is separated.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be careful not to cut yourself during the procedure, for if it is torn, it will be difficult to lift (the stringy substance) and may cause harm to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the stringy substance has completely been removed, place your hand over the area of the wound filled with wool soaked in vinegar and oil (both roasted and unroasted), and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is constricted by twisting and not straight as I have said, then it is necessary for you to cut along all parts of the twist and at the points of the twist, and suspend it with a hook until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Be careful not to cut the vein during your incision and not to harm it, for it will be difficult to lift (the stringy substance); use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the constricted vein:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be made as with hooks or of sharp point so as not to harm the vein; it should be large and flexible, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; it is unnecessarily thick as I have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of leg veins.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries such as Al-Andalus (Arabic lands) and India, in arid regions with little vegetation and where there is neither grass nor herbs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	It is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The growth of it (the stringy substance) is due to putrefaction which comes from the affected area such as venom within the body, snakes, worms and parasites generating between the affected area and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the onset of this condition is the swelling in the affected area, and the area becomes inflamed; the vein begins to seep from the site of that inflammation which resembles a plant (or plant growth).
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Therefore, when the limb appears to be rotten, you must cover it with a lead weight of approximately two dragons' weight and submerge it, then leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Stay watchful for any changes in the surrounding tissues during this period and cover it with lead again if necessary.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the condition persists, you must make an incision in it and cover the remaining part with a piece of cloth; do not cut into the surrounding tissue until it has completely emerged from the wound, for if you cut it, it will be constricted and enter the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, and bad ulcers at that site.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be treated gently and gradually extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the body and there remains no cause within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, it has issued in some men whose length is approximately 5 palms and of this I have already heard that one measures up to 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is cut during the time of treatment, insert a probe into its wound and perforate it with a long probe to the body, until everything in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then care for it through the healing of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes produces worms, and more often when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it produces many horrific exits, and it is expelled from each exit as worms.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat it in this way as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the cut on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine disease in some lands because it often affects cows and the worm is relatively small which is born between the hide and the flesh, and moves up and down throughout the body and is manifested through the sensation of the limbs one by one until it bursts the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors such as worms, snakes, worms, and roundworms in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared due to its malice, because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it is passed through the nose, causing strong nausea in it and entering and destroying the brain, and many times it does so.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, do not proceed unless you have its walking and appearance at the sensation, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is over it and what is below it with medicine and strong constriction, and apply dryness on it and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is attached to the flesh and does not burst, then you stop cauterizing fire on the spot until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that being passed through the nose near the nose, strengthen above the eyebrow with strong constriction and apply dryness on it, and remove it; and the patient must use cleansing of their body with medicines evacuating bad humors and guard themselves from foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the cut on illness of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called naris in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and moreover, it is confined to member after member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I advised you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the brachial vein of the arm, which had been torn apart for an hour, and then I saw that inflammation rise up like a worm moving towards this location, but more slowly than usual, as if it were alive when it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that location settled in the muscle and stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I advised her to turn herself over her entire body as I saw; and it was very marveled at the change of it and the speed of member after member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar in the upper nostrils in that manner, but I have seen many which turn pain to be transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not with the nose as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was this because the woman was old, where the body and veins are dry, and in this case, the sensation of windiness is transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear in this way in those who are pleasurable and have humid bodies with weakened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not show yourself at the nose as we have said, but strengthen it and leave it slightly and dry it until that windiness is expelled constricted, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your nostrils, then you cure it with evacuation of the body and with what expels windiness, and treat it with pills made of fumitory and pills of serapion and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of teeth.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Teeth are various according to the species, and depending on the places in the body where they grow, because their diversity is that of those with large points, small ones, concave ones, serrated ones, which are solid; and from those with three corners, and from those to which tongues belong; and from those that are teeth.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is second in members and afflictions, according to two manners: for the members or principal members are caused, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, ribs, hernia, bladder, and their like; and therefore, when it appears in any of these members and presents signs of death, I advise avoiding extraction of that arrowhead in those where death has already occurred in whom it is more disposed, and when you do not see these evil signs, and the arrowhead is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of a stab wound are when an arrow passes through bone and pierces the skull which is above the brain, for this happens suddenly with vehement swelling, blindness, dizziness, fever in the head, inflammation and fever of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, and the word is quickly separated and destroyed and the voice is lost. And there is exuded from the wound place moisture like white powder resembling pus, and eyes from it similar to watery flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from cure and extraction of the arrowhead unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the signs of an arrowhead in the heart, which is close to the left breast, are such that it feels like something hard has been inserted and not empty. The movement of the arrowhead is similar to that of a pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is cooling at the extremities, sweating, and fainting. And therefore, you should know that death approaches quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrowhead has wounded the lung are immediately of spumy blood from the wound and the vessels near the neck are disturbed, and the patient's color is changed, and he exhales a great spirit and asks for cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrowhead pierces the membrane that is in the foot, and pain follows which is similar to minor ribs, and makes a great and violent pain and sigh, but not all the limbs of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrowhead pierces the stomach, there will be a strong smell coming from the wound of some indigestible.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrowhead pierces the abdomen and is lodged in it, there is a fissure or tear of the wound, or tissue, or hernia that has been disrupted, and there is no hope for recovery through extraction of the arrowhead.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrowhead pierces the bladder and is discharged outward through urine, and some cause comes to the parts outside, and there is strong pain over the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and buttocks, spine, neckbone, pelvis and their similar in members are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrowhead does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisonous arrowhead.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend this to you that I have seen of these arrows, which means by this on self-treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow pierces the tear duct of the eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the hairs of the eyelash, and healed, and no harm came to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	I extracted another arrow from a Jew that had pierced him in the eye at the root of his eyelid, leaving only the palpebra behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained except for a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp arrow of the Turks with a lion head without eyelashes.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew sentenced it, and no harm came to his eye by this.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been pierced in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with eyelashes; and then I incised it between two tendons, and it was already submerged in the throat of the man; and then I softened it with that, and then I carefully extracted it, and the Christian healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I extracted another arrow from a man who had been pierced in the stomach, and I thought he would die by it; but since thirty days passed and there was no change in his condition due to any of his dispositions, I incised it and cauterized it, and he healed, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound was healed over it, and after six years, the arrowhead emerged from the root of the buttock.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom an arrow pierced her stomach, and the wound was healed within it, and there was no change in her condition after three years, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom an arrow pierced his face, and the wound healed and the arrow was extracted without causing great pain, and it had similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extract the splinter from the man's nose located in the middle, which had fallen and declined towards the right side slightly, and it was entirely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	It was called to treat him approximately three days after the splintering incident.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Here is the translation for the given sentence:
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Spread the area with a plaster containing astringent and digestive properties, so that it may adhere to the wound site, revealing where the splinter is located, and cutting through it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Do not be concerned if the splinter has reached an insignificant location; continue applying the plaster to it for many days, and do not be alarmed about any accidents; as the wound heals, the patient will feel relief from the splinter's extraction within several days, and then report this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then place an acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until pus appears, and with the probe, I will search for the splinter's end that adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Ensure that the wound opening is adjusted with the application of the acute medicine until I can see clearly the splinter's end; and in the meantime, report to me any changes within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Ensure that the wound expands, and it becomes possible for me to insert forceps into it; secure them, and do not remove them immediately. Then, continue to search and manipulate it with various tools until one day, using forceps specifically made for this purpose, grasp it firmly, as its form will be revealed in the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believed that the nose cartilage was not restored, and I will restore it, and the wound heals, and the patient recovers fully, with no recurrence of issues in him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend the quality of splinter extraction for which you will note rules and significances concerning what I have not mentioned, since the sections and definitions of this art are not easily understood through narrative or free translation.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsmen compare much with little, and based on the present state, they infer about the absent one, and they find new operations and innovative tools when dealing with unusual causes in this art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that splinters are not lost from the members in which they are embedded except through two ways: either by attraction towards the location where it entered, or conversely, by moving away from the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The splinter that is lost by the location where it entered, or it is a splinter originating from a meaty place and thrown out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not remove it immediately after catching, then you should leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh can be cut and the attraction and exit of the splinter is relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not remove it immediately, then leave it for several days and apply pressure and movement to it daily, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not remove it immediately, then you should wait for several days and perforate the circuit of the splinter in every direction with a small needle around the entire area until the space is widened by the splinter, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splinter is embedded in the skull bone and has already passed through one of the brain chambers and appears in the patient with signs I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the splinter and leave it until the patient's condition stabilizes for several days; because if the splinter reaches the base, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the splinter is only embedded in the bone of the chest and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any signs of those accidents, then you should try to attract the splinter and the wound area.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not deeply embedded and you do not need to extract it, then administer needles around the splinter's circumference as recommended, and take care of the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the splinter is hidden in the chest area and it is not felt, then you should probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, you should draw it out using appropriate tools suitable for pulling it out.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot approach the wound due to the constriction of the ulcer and the length of the bone, and it is neither bone nor nerve nor vein there, then you shall make an incision into the ulcer until it is expanded and extractable.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If the ulcer is walled in, you shall deliver the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the skill you can muster; and if you cannot approach the exit of the flesh due to the fracture of the walls and their twisting into each other until it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the removal of the needle in any location where it is, you shall use a twist with your hand and forceps on all sides until it yields; and gently but subtly so as not to break the needle, making its withdrawal difficult for you and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot approach it at that time, leave it for several days until the surrounding parts have healed, and then return to it when it has been relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	However, if there is counterflow of blood, you shall administer what has been said about the cure in its own chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer all methods possible for the removal of the needle; do so with ease, tranquility, patience, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, counter the needle in such a way that the patient's condition is as much like the figure in which you must extract the needle, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not within your capabilities, administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the needles that are extruded in opposition to the other side or have already caused some damage to the surrounding parts, or cause the extramural area of the needle to be palpable due to the part above the proper cavity and sometimes prominently; then you shall incise over it; and make the incision according to the size in which forceps can grasp it; and place your hand over it, because it will come out easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, you shall twist the knife against the needle until it enters the bone, and widen the incision made, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then return to it until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the needle's shaft is there, you shall push it with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is cut and you wish to administer a push, insert your finger into it, if it is hollow, stir it concave so that it enters the concavity of the needle and then push it with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the needle is concave, you shall push it forcefully with a strong instrument into it, because the needle will be relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is entrapped, you shall make sure that you concave all the flesh surrounding it, if you can do so, and then cure it with what is appropriate for its condition.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle is lodged in the foot, or stomach, bladder, ribs, and is close enough that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible to incise over it, then incise over it, guarding against the incision of vein or nerve, extract it, sew up the wound if necessary, and cure it until it has healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps for extracting needles is:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Its tips are shaped like bird's beaks that are made with scissors to grasp the needle without leaving it.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made small, large, few or medium-sized motes, according to the size and thickness of the needle and the size of the wound and constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of an egg-like indentation at this curved extremity like the beak of a bird so that the intestine is relieved in it, and pressure on that swelling:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape for pressing on swollen extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a reed to relieve the intestine in the curved indentation and press it with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein-cutting (phlebotomy).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to cut thirty. in the head there are sixteen. two pulsating veins are near the ears, called the superiors; two herbs that are in the temples and appear evident; two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes called the lacrimal veins; and one prepared vein at the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; two veins near the neck; two veins near the upper lip; two veins near the lower lip; these are the veins that are called the palmar veins; and two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	However, the veins that are cut in the arms are five. for one of those is the cephalic, and it is necessary to let it lie quiet; the people call it “the vein of the head,” and it is superficial, and it is a median vein, and it consists of one branch from the basilica, and another branch from the cephalic; and the people call that one “the vein of the whole body,” and basilica is the vein which is paused in the domestic artery, and it is called “cubital,” and common people call it “the vein of the abdomen”; the median cubital vein, which passes through the wrist, and is the one that is cut, and it appears above the point manifestly; and the cephalic vein, which is between the mentioned auricular (?) and the smallest finger, and there are two branches of it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of those is located below the curve of the domestic artery, and the second is popliteal, and its location is below the calf of the domestic artery; and sciatic, and its location is below the calf of the wild artery; and in the calf there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of the veins near the ears is for old catarrhs, migraines, and headaches (or scalp diseases) that are ancient.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what I recommend to you: it should be shaved the patient's head, and the patient's head should be washed in the occipital area near both veins with a large, clean cloth; place the patient's neck strongly with a bandage that covers their ears and the locations of the veins are near the ears in two places pressed on the patient's head; and you shall take that with your fingers, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your fingers, here is the test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical lancet and the one that is pointed, and insert it below the vein into the cavity until bloodletting comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand over the vein and cavity above it, and insert the incision in the vein with an incising instrument.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers or close to that amount; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And press firmly on the pulse and let it stop bleeding until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And at the beginning of the book, the incision and its cauterization have already been discussed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Modern translation: Among the two arteries that are at the temples, their assistance in phlebotomy is an ancient and harmful emigration and persistent otology and a course of acute fluid overflow to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy in that case, as I recommend to you, is to have the patient lower their head until both arteries appear for clear perception and demonstrate the pulses below them after your word; then you shall make an incision.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Modern translation: Then raise the bandage above the vein at the elbows, and indicate with your words where to make the phlebotomy incision, then insert the lancet and lift the vein upwards; and make an incision in this manner as you have done in other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Modern translation: Then unfasten the patient's bandage and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and also place your hand over that area and press it firmly, and keep it in place with strong compression until it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Modern translation: And now, the preparation of them (the veins) has been described, as well as the incision and attraction at the beginning of this treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Modern translation: And thus, the phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the superficial temporal vein for ancient facial maladies like emigration and inflammation and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy in this case is as I recommend to you, that is, the patient should lower their head with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument called the lancet, which has this shape.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Modern translation: Place the puncture in the prominent end of the lancet on that vein and pierce it with a sharp blow or another cause in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then unfasten the perforation of the patient and keep it compressed until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Modern translation: Sometimes a vein is opened with phlebotomy on the side, but it should not be done with an acute angle as in other phlebotomies, rather it should be done obliquely, because the bone is close and strong, and the phlebotomy would easily break if it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Modern translation: Among the two veins that are at the eyes of both eyelids for scabies of the eyelids due to inflammation and sores in the eyelids, and facial maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient should lower their head with a bandage, and you make the phlebotomies, while standing above them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Modern translation: Make the phlebotomy obliquely along the transverse direction, with a slight long axis and perform few phlebotomies, because in that area there is not much flesh; if the phlebotomy is thin, then break its extremity.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Modern translation: Let the blood flow as needed, and then place your hand over that area and press it firmly for a new day, and unfasten them (the phlebotomies).
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Modern translation: The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is given for acute fever and violent swelling, and facial maladies such as emigration and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient should lower their head and place your left hand on their nose, and take the thin and long lancet, and place it in the middle of the nasal cavity according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear for perception here, and blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Modern translation: It is necessary that you complete the phlebotomy slowly with your hand and let the blood flow according to your need; and hold it for a night, because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Modern translation: The phlebotomy of the two guiding veins is given for constipation, the beginning of leprosy, and many other diseases and impetigo, as well as corrosive ulcers like scrofula.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that the patient should lower each one in their head gently; and the operator stands over the patient's head, while the patient lies on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Modern translation: And make the phlebotomy along the long vein with a wide and shallow lancet, and draw blood according to a measured quantity or as needed at that time; and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Modern translation: And unfasten the bandages and compress the two veins gently with moderate compression to prevent the patient from being agitated, and let it rest until morning as the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Modern translation: The phlebotomy of the marginal veins is given for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, corrosive ulcers, and malformations, as well as malformations that are at the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Modern translation: And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is to have the patient lie down before you, and lower their head with a bandage, and then roll back the lips, and observe two veins of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each one, and this is more noticeable because in the circuit of these veins there are many small black veins; and therefore make an incision for each one with an oblique incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt which one it is, and do not know which of those, then you should open the incision of the largest one, and the most obvious one of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Make it appear as if the two veins are in the lips above [the area].
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is more common to cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Of the two veins that are below the tongue, it is more advantageous for the carotid artery puncture in the neck to be performed at the hyoid bone, throat disease, and oral diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of puncturing those is that it follows the patient's pulse just below the throat, lifts the tongue, looks down at the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Therefore, puncture each one; and be careful not to injure your hand in puncturing those, because they are arteries below those.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are punctured in the coyde are those that it is customary in all men, and the puncture of them is done according to two methods, or they put [something] mirtilat or olive oil at a subtle decline; or they cut with a scalpel, and call it anessil, and this is the method of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This anessil is the one that is suitable for cutting, and these are specific small and subtle cuts according to the width of the veins and according to their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of mirtil puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It should be like that, sometimes, and it is necessary to open the veins concave full of apparent thick blood, and those that contain thick clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method of olive oil puncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This puncture is smaller and of more subtle termination, and it is necessary for the puncture of fine veins that contain thin citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The advantage of the puncture of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it drains the blood from diseases below the throat and neck, and from what soaks the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the person performing the puncture to be careful when puncturing it, as there is an artery below it, and if he misses the mark in the puncture of the puncture, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding, so it is necessary not to puncture it with a sharp needle but to cut it with scissors.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by a clear manifestation, it is necessary that you search for another branch or seek a vein ramification; or puncture in the location of the end of the arm, as that one appears clearly; and cut it with scissors as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want to puncture the metacarpus, it is necessary in front of the arm's stricture that you touch the place inside known as the wrist, and apply heat over it; and approach the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with scissors as we have said; and be careful not to injure the percussion near the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, as the lymph swells, inflammation in the place that you have heated, that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the puncture like that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin red, you know that it is arterial blood; and then you should tighten and stop your finger over that area for a long period of time; and remove your finger, and if the blood is cut off, because after many observations it is cut off, you should tighten the arm and let it rest.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Keep the patient away from their urine, be wary of them and do not let anyone approach them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the abscess does not burst, and you do not need to provide medical care for them, then you must incise the artery if it appears; because the extremity becomes contracted, and the blood is absorbed; or take scissors and open that, and take a ligature and tighten it over the location of the vein with constriction downwards and with powder and pills into the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the abscess has burst, that is good; otherwise, you should treat it with the remedy prescribed before remembering the location of the powders for draining blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The drainage of the abscess is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of ligature on the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, the lumbar vein puncture is beneficial for draining blood from the subclavian part of the neck and the area below the chest; because it consists of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The person performing the puncture must be careful in the lumbar puncture because it is located near a nerve; therefore, if you adjust incorrectly during the puncture and injure the nerve, it will result in paralysis, making healing difficult, and recovery will not be complete. This nerve can often be observed by sensation; however, if it is hidden in some individuals and is subtle and not visible, then you must stop the lumbar puncture with the incision made at the incisura alnisili, and avoid injuring the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you must puncture it lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the cephalic vein puncture is that it drains blood from the head and helps with headache patients.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Therefore, in this particular case, if you want the puncture to be made with an olive or a myrtle syringe, because it is safe for all veins, as there is neither artery nor nerve present nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to make sure that when performing the puncture, you do not poke the needle into the lacertum too deeply, but rather find a more easily accessible location, and look for this location only after checking with an initial percussion that there is no vein beneath the site of the puncture in any way.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is important to note that in some cases, an abscess may develop if the puncture is not done in the initial percussion, but this should not be confused with an abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the puncture and its potential complications are numerous, in which case you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first point to consider is that puncture should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope for recovery and caution against complications of illness; it should be done in one of the veins that are on the arm, namely: cephalic, lumbar, and basilic; it should be done at the beginning of spring, during fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	The puncture should be performed on the third day or at least one day after three hours have passed since meals.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Puncture is administered when it is appropriate and necessary; either at night or during the day, at any time and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is necessary that children under the age of twelve are not punctured; women should not be punctured before their fourth month or after their seventh, and the elderly should not be punctured if they are over sixty years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	If someone wants to be punctured in some way, it is necessary to clean the intestines before the puncture with a lion-based clyster, if there is any fissure retained, to prevent superfluous fluid from entering the puncture of the intestine, which are pure, and not affecting the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Puncture should not be performed on patients with nausea or vomiting, nor those suffering from illness or drunkenness until their condition has improved; nor should it be performed on a patient with edema; however, puncture is to be feared in the case of colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, increased coitus and work, and exercise of fasting or vigils, and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Also consider the condition of the humors before puncture if the blood is thick; with food and drink, and medications if they are possible for that patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Bathe the patient if there is no contraindication, or exercise them with some exercises to thin the blood.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Puncture should be stopped on the feet during the day, around three o'clock, as we said before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Therefore, make sure the feet of that patient are kept away from all animal and physical conditions such as anxiety, anger, fear, labor, excess work, coitus, and similar conditions during that day.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the patient's bedside, let the causes be present for use in accordance with the custom of men who have aromatics, perfumes, balms and similar things in as much quantity as possible.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet on a finger that is swollen or the finger of the one who should be lanced.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then move the arm towards you and press it with your hand using the lancet two or three times; then tighten the bandage with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If the constriction is too tight, since it should not be constricted or if there is superfluidity, then prevent fluid from flowing out; or if it is for softening, then prevent the outflow of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then approach the constriction, and have the one who should be lanced press his own mass between where the veins are inflamed and palpable.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then apply the lancet to the lancing site with a little antiseptic oil specifically; then pause your left hand over that vein, at the location where the lancing is desired, so that the vein oozes a little and the percussion is softened, since when the veins are contracted like cords, you should lance there, and in those that are full of turbulence, you should press the lancing site, and if the lancing pierces the vein, it is too tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for these reasons, the lancet should be firmly held and carefully applied to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the lancing, but if the vein is pierced in one stroke, that is good; and if not, you should try another stroke at that location a little later, or in haste if the location is not apparent.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is apparent, or the patient feels fearful, you should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, since a strong pressure will cause an abscess to grow, nor enter it into baths.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the lancing if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and the blood flows thinly, and you fear that there will not be enough blood, then repeat the lancing in that area according to rules and adjust the opening slightly, and do so quickly before the location becomes an abscess, since in most people a small incision should be made.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has become an abscess, do not repeat the lancing there, since you have no excuse for this; and pause on some part of the oil opening, since it relieves the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at that location to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similar treatment is administered by making an oil incision in every lancing of veins where the prohibition of blood flow is necessary, and do so according to Tyrian acupuncture and Hippocratic wisdom when one of those is paused over the location, since the blood becomes thin and turns around when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large abscess is formed at the lancing location, which often happens, especially in those who are not bled that stroke or in the incision of the vein that is too small, then you should cauterize it and apply a sponge soaked in infused water and salt, slightly scalded, and hold it for an hour, since it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to do this with the blood of that vein and completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If it remains in the location for several days with any blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you wish, pause on some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamine or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Often abscesses and swellings require lancing from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on it, and if you find that it is softening, then apply pressure on it, which means the swelling is bad and harmful; and so beware that you pause on some cause of what has been said, since strong blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply plasters with what is hardening to make the location tougher, and treat it with the other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the type of blood that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Since if the blood is black, you should allow it to flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, you should allow it to flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, you should leave the sharpness until its sharpness has passed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	It is necessary for a person who is full and strong and has the necessity of bloodletting in one stroke, that the incision of the vein should be expanded and the lancing should be large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In a weak person, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw blood in many strokes, and the incision should be small.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for vein lancing is a transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of lancing abscess is safe from blood flow and the incision of nerves, and it is praised and considered safe that lancing according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	When fainting often occurs during the process of lancing, it is necessary to treat that person before lancing with a piece of bread infused in vinegar of milk thistle or simple scalded oil; and draw out the pus from it in three or four views.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is swelling of the complexion, then take before lancing a mixture infused in myrrh syrup or honey scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or scented and fragrant oil.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs during the process of lancing and it is only due to blood, then it is necessary to take water of meat and subtle fragrant oil to drink; and use aromatics, and bind his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to drain his arm and dissolve the blood gradually according to viewing, it is necessary for the person in whom lancing is for great evacuation, and the effect of it is freul, which drains the blood little by little, is as such according to the amount of the power each day.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to drain his arm and expel the blood at certain intervals, and his body is strong, then do this after seven or nine hours from the first lancing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to draw blood from the body contrary to its flow towards the affected area, it is necessary that this be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in a body in which blood is already heated and sharpened and causes fever, it is necessary to expel the blood from that one in one view and draw out a large amount of blood and increase the opening until fainting occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions for lancing; and place your hand over the pulse of the affected area, so as not to let death occur in the place of fainting, for many views can endanger that when the lancer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary that when you want to drain the arm and expel the blood at intervals, as if the openings of the vein are closed and it is difficult to extract the blood in general, that you press hard on that with violence and extend it slightly, because that is harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If you wait until the arm is to be lanced again; or reinforce the effect of lancing by coagulating the blood in the vein openings; or rest on tarred alum, or with sage, and compress it lightly until the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if there is a need to drain the blood again and it is not an excuse, then you should lance that one over that area or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called the "sinew of the arm" is lanced in the area of the cuff or the basilic, if they are not contracted or swollen, because it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the lancing is that the patient inserts his hand into hot water until the needle becomes noticeable and the vein appears.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then bind it firmly with a narrow bandage; and lance the transverse way, not longitudinally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the opening large and your lancing with which you lance that one over the joint of the hand slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, you are exempt from immersing your hand in hot water, and it is forbidden to warm the body with hot water in winter times.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	Lancing of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, as there is neither a pulsating vein nor nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	Lancing of the wrist on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the lancing is that you bind the hand firmly with a narrow bandage, as you place it in hot water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the eye; and lance it transversely; if this does not work, do not continue to probe.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Be aware that you do not prolong the hand with lancing, as nerves are exposed there without skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, as if you do not immerse your hand in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and flow is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	As the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then you should rest on olive oil and salt over the vein, so that it does not solidify too much; and this must be done in all cases.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The translation of the sentence is: "However, the aid of left-handed trepanation (trepanning being a surgical procedure that involves drilling a hole in the skull) is given to the sicknesses of the liver."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"Perform the trepanation as you have done with the other (side/patient)."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"The aid of the saphenous vein trepanation is for illnesses located in the lower part of the body, such as hernias, retention of menstrual flow, and lung diseases and ulcers of the chest and old wounds, and similar illnesses."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"The quality of the trepanation on that (side/patient) is that the patient places their foot in hot water and make a hole there until the veins appear; then around the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein must be felt and from that point it should be pierced, and from there it branches out on the surface of the foot making small incisions."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And therefore trepanate the foot broadly or to the side of the cavity must be pierced, as it is better and cleaner."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you trepanate on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to damage the nerves that are below there on the surface of the foot, and pause your trepanation with the one you trepanated through earlier, as if you were about to cut it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"Let your trepanations be small (incisions)."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"However, if bleeding is forbidden (prohibited), then immerse the foot in hot water and let the blood run out in that until it is drained."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the trepanator makes a mistake in the first observation, immerse it (the foot) again in hot water and let the blood run out with the trepanation for a short while, as the area is clean; do not worry about any danger, but be careful of the nerves as has been said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"Perform the same operation on the other foot (side/patient)."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And of the sciatic vein, the location as has been said must be pierced to the side of the wild thigh (hip)."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"The aid of trepanation on that (side/patient) is for sciatica pain when it is due to bleeding."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"The quality of the trepanation on that (side/patient) is that the patient immerses themselves in a bath, and makes their back stiff and presses their loins from below the waist to above the thigh for four fingers length using a thin long bandage, which can only be seen through it."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And therefore when it appears (the vein), then trepanate it according to each technique that is possible for you and according to the transverse, as this is better; or cut it through incision or sever it through cutting, as the area is clean."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is in many men who are weakened; and if it atrophies (the vein), and it does not appear to the senses, then trepanate one of its branches, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the auricular (anterior tibial) and the anular (posterior tibial) veins."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood run as much as you want."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And loosen the constriction and pause over the location of the trepanation site and press the area lightly, as it heals easily."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Of ventosection (suction) and the qualities of using them."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Ventoses are for corns, or warts, or veins."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"Ventosection is done in two ways: one with incision and blood extraction, and the other without incision."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this ventosection without incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the locations where ventoses with incision and blood extraction are administered are twelve throughout the body, of which one is where ventoses are placed, and it is the anus; and the middle part of the neck; and the ventoses on the chin below the jawbone; and two spatulas; and the ventoses in the elbow joint; and the ventoses in the wrist joint; and the ventoses in both hips; and the ventoses in both knees."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"Ventosection does not extract the blood from veins, but only from small scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the effect of cauterization through trepanation; nor is it necessary that ventosection be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by accumulation inside until the entire body is evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"However, if necessity requires ventosection for an illness or a continuation, administer it at the beginning and end of every month, and in its middle and at any other time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"The cause is that in some men blood is multiplied within them until they require extraction through ventosection and become gravely sick; and of those who become accumulation and inflammation on their face and head, and neck; and of those whose face becomes swollen and dark and heavy in the eyes; and of those who leak from their ventosection site; and of those whose nose is congested; and of those who taste blood in their mouth or the tongue is protruded and spits blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who have bleeding during sleep, pain, old wounds and other similar symptoms."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it often happens for some reason, and specifically if it is in the third or fourth day of the month, then command venesection to be performed after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	In addition to venesection of the neck, when that causes heaviness in the head and if it causes sinking into the lungs; however, it must be appropriate evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this venesection is at the site of cranial puncture.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not allowed to use one who is suffering from complete plague or catarrh, for it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not necessary to use the elderly, and in those who have feverish illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if that person is to remain there continually, then forgetfulness is performed; and for this reason, you must command the venesection performer to dip his hand a little in water at the opening on the side, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	However, venesection of the nape is at the site of cranial puncture of the vein of the occiput and the basilica: and for this reason it causes asthma, constriction of the airways, and the splitting of the windpipe, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And the venesection of the nape must be small, for if it is left untouched, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And venesection of the temporal region causes accidental pain in the head and otalmia, migraine, inflammation, and toothaches; and it is at the site of cranial puncture of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the venesection performer not to press his hand with incision, so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Venesection on the side of the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, similar to other illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is at the site of cranial puncture called alisherius, which is between the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	However, venesection performed on both cheeks causes cephata, which is caused by congestion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And venesection at the inner sides of both eyelids also provides cranial puncture of three veins, namely basilica, occipital and cephalic; because it draws blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	You must command the venesection performer not to proceed with incision because the area is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a venesection on the buttocks, which causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the venesection performer to make a large venesection, and that it should be from the artery, because the area requires a deep incision; and strong veins are broken by subtle venesections and it should be incised with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	However, venesections on the legs should be made smaller because of manifest minority, for they draw blood from the entire body, and cause ancient pain in the throat and womb, and bladder; they induce menstruation, and cause both sore and abdomen; and are at the site of cranial puncture of two popliteal veins, and also at the sites of two cubital veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens the entire body and causes fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the venesections also at the site of the cubital veins provide the benefit similar to the venesections of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position for venesections is that you hold the venesection at the beginning for a short time and then let it bleed gradually, and do not prolong the position of the venesections; instead, hold them lightly, keep them constantly, and allow the humors to come to the place by gravity.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this and continue until you see the location redden and swell and the redness of blood appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and draw blood little by little, and pay attention to the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man with a thin skin and few pores, it is necessary for you to incise once and not more, so as not to ulcerate the location.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the venesection performer to widen the incision and make a small puncture, and take blood with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you incise twice because in the first incision the path to thinning of the blood and its wateriness is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	However, in the second one for the vigorous search for the thick extraction of blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very viscous, it should be incised a third time to achieve the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to draw blood little by little or in small amounts, it is sufficient for us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to draw a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary for us to incise with heavy incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The depth of the incision is the term for scarification only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the incision sites with a lenient, resolving oil; if it is in summer, use aloe oil or violet oil, or double-almond oil, or camomile oil, and if it is in winter, use nutmeg oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or turpentine oil, and similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick, greasy, fry it with bitter oil, or balm oil, aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the hernia has large openings with soft flesh, it is necessary to prohibit oil and wash the hernia sites with warm water or water boiled with salt, or water of vinegar, or water of barley, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	If the blood is watery, wash the hernia sites with vinegar water, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	If the swellings are thick, wash the hernia sites with elderberry vinegar, or water of fennel, which is greater calaminthe, or decocotion of anise, or camomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The hernia should be kept away from bathing; having it administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it should sleep next to the hernia.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary to be done so that a venous sandbag (?) is strapped before ventotomy (?).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the hernia or the one who will phlebotomize (?) is bilious and has venous bleeding and inflammation, it is necessary to take cold remedies, such as milkgrease acetic acid, endive in vinegar, and lettuce, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, and acidic foods, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	If the complexion is greasy, it should take artichoke syrup or artichoke syrup of asafoetida seeds and sumac, and a mild-smelling oil between winter and spring; and it should be instructed to drink little and eat sparingly, and avoid poultry, rabbit, and fish and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	It is necessary that on the day of hernia surgery and phlebotomy, the drink should be more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give them turmeric and alum in drink at certain hours for some men, or medicines of musk, which are muskroot or celery, before hernia surgery or phlebotomy or near it, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is made thinner; and they should not take that scalding (?).
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the hernias that are not incised are hernias that are paused in the liver, on the spleen and on the umbilicus, in the joints, and in the anus, because these members cannot tolerate incision on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not sought for these but the attraction of blood from a member, such as pausing a hernia on the breast in case of bleeding of the nose and blood from the nostrils; and they use it to dissolve thick, inviscid swelling of the member, such as pausing on the abdomen and umbilicus; because this rarefies the member and scalds it and eases the pain by resolving swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	It has already been paused on the nose when it occurs in its opening or pain, because by the strong attraction it reduces swelling and eliminates the pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similar is when it is paused on the liver and spleen, as it resolves swelling in those trapped places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These hernias are administered with juice only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of thick water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is so that the hernia is filled and made large, this is thick water only or water in which are cut herbs appropriate for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Method of hernia administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, according to how we have made it; and the amount of the probe (?) should be the size of a palm; and in the depth, in the area that is in the circumference, the size should be the same as the depth, the prong should be small according to the amount that enters into it with an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of earth or clay, with thick edges, lion's teeth and smooth for it not to injure the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And a small, horizontal channel of earth or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this hernia should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the little difference from that according to the diseases and the state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The hernias of infants and weaklings are other than the hernias of young and strong-bodied people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of stopping this abscess with fire upon the member (body part) is that it should be opened with a suitable amount of wood (firewood) in front of a little wax candle, and it should be stopped on the middle of the lower abdomen at the proper place of the abscess, so that the fire is ignited nearby the incision without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The abscess on the patient's member should be stopped at the place mentioned earlier, until when we have boils and do not need to open it and let the steam rise from that hole, then the abscess will soon be resolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Heat the wound according to its method, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, in an abscess related to pleurisy, it is administered with water (without a lower abdominal transverse line or hole), and is filled only with water and stopped on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the method: The larger the abscess, the better, as it can hold more water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital 75.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuggae are not administered in swollen members but in members where the position of abscesses is not possible due to their small size, such as gums and similar areas; or in denuded members (exposed bone), such as the nose and its vicinity.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those Sanguisuggae that you have found in the clean waters of purification.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	They should be soaked in clean water for two days and then left to rest until they are hungry, and no cause remains in the stomach of those (leaches). It is appropriate to evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and abscesses; it is appropriate to cleanse the patient's member until it becomes red; and it is appropriate for them to be placed over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and ready.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the area with the abscess, it is more beneficial in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with salt water and apply cold water; then cleanse it and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the bleeding of the patient continues after using Sanguisuggae, and it is draining, you should place a cloth dipped in cold water on top until the drainage stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle vitriol triturated (or similar substances for stiptics causes) on it until the bleeding stops; or place hot fava beans (broad beans) that have been boiled and ground into powder over the area and leave them there until they adhere to the affected location, and the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repetition of Sanguisuggae, when possible, changing those (leaches) as needed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the use of Sanguisuggae is prohibited or suspended, wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the affected locations until it bleeds; then place them over it, as those that feel any bleeding will soon adhere to it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish them to pass (stool), sprinkle a little of crushed aloe, salt or ash over it, and let it be immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is observed as necessary in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones due to accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, beware that foolish doctors and the common people boast about this chapter, and those who for a time do not read the books of the ancients nor learn a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, this method of the learned men in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it for a time, but I have only applied what follows after prolonged reading of the books of the ancients and study on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct it to experience and study in the course of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And you have now described in this chapter all that concerns the main science and on which my experience has been passed; therefore, I have condensed it for you and relieved it of lengthy discussion; and I have summarized it at the end of summary; and shown it at the end of explanation; and formed many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by adding explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the essence of fractures in bones, from which it is necessary to make a preliminary explanation before we begin remembering the restoration of broken members and various others of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let me state in the prelude of this chapter the summary of the discourse; and the chapters to which it is necessary for the craftsman to devote himself and stand still on the truth of these, so that you and those who are prompt and can learn or understand this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or break occurs, it is necessary at the beginning to apply phlebotomy or leeching to it, or whatever else is not prohibited by any reason, such as weakness of virtue, or if it happens in an invalid, or in old age, or during hot weather, or during cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be provided with food consisting of grassy herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill them if they are filled with food and any food that fills the veins with blood, unless you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his primary regimen according to his usual custom.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritive foods consisting of dense and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat flour and water, rice, cabbage, peas, beef, fresh fish, thick milk, eggs, and similar foods, and on this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones broken in men who are in the prime of life and in old age cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time due to the drying out of these members, and those that are in infancy are consolidated and continued, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects some cause similar to glue in the broken bone of every part, which causes swelling that adheres to it until it is consolidated and hardened together, until the end of growth and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit this from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and dense, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Diversity of fractures according to diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, because a fracture in the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture in the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will proceed with the memory of every type of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures in bones are diversified within themselves; because a curved fracture is different from one that occurs at the stars, and some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the tibia and shinbone and those that occur without or with addition, such as the one prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all cases it is an engine or torment specifically in the restoration of him, according to his recall of himself in distinct locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A movable splint for a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	A fractured bone is recognized by its deformity, and from this projection and perception of it in sensation, and from this when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no deformity apparent or it does not hurt when touched with movement of the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a deformity or small fissure, in which case you must press it with your hand and compress all of it; pause over the medicine that comes to mind at that moment suitable for the location; and apply narrowly with subtle compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place which is arched and not split in two or otherwise that does not happen in the stagnation, such as the entire part of its circumference, then it is necessary to begin from your time with the rectification of it, having applied an abscess cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess cauterization has occurred, then leave it for several days until the abscess ceases; and apply a guaze over it according to any method that you can with delicacy and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and piercing of it is easier than drilling a bone where such stagnation occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Apply strength according to the recall of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there is stagnation in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is an arm or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place yourself in a position according to which you will hold the injured member according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then proceed with the return of these additions with skill and according to any method that can be used in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware so that your strength does not harm the patient by your operation or injury; and proceed with the skill that you apply one bone to another in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that time you touch with your hand this, and if there are any other causes here, correct this and hold it in place according to the quantity of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as do foolish doctors who often cause abscesses through their operation or cause contractions in the member as we have seen through the operation of their hands.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And apply annexation, alignment and proper operation and compression of this member, rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make him aware not to harm it at the time of his vigils and sleep, observe its rotation and movement, and you must take care of it, and must take into account all of his movements with your entire strength; and wait for the position of the member to be in a position that is assured of pain, which causes it when it feels the position of the injured or damaged member; then it is necessary to change its position to another position where there is no pain; and guard against this so that the position of it is straight and held firmly, so that the member does not become deformed when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the compression of the injured member is that which I recommend; for you know that fractured members are various in their smallness and size, and in the shape of these.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small such as the arm and the thigh and similar ones, then it is necessary that the covering be of thin wool.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are thick such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a broad and hard covering, because the linen connects the large member with strong compression all around with compression, so that filth does not enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin, begin with your alignment of evacuation, pause appropriately for this, on the location of the fracture with three or four coverings according to what the member needs; and strengthen your hand a little with the linen.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And approach this to the area above the break in the fracture site, and strengthen little by little so that your compression does not weaken the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And approach the length of the cover at the site of the fracture slightly, and soften the little compression bit by bit, until you take a large portion of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another bandage and wrap it over the injured site with the cover, and approach the covers to the area below the fracture; and your operation is in the compression of the bandage and softening of this according to what I have said in the primary cover above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And approach the stops of the lion skin or wool in which the deformity of the fracture is held, if there is deformity; and do not stop in any other cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And approach the other bandage, and apply over these well-made stars coverings promptly if there is no inflammation or abscess cauterization in the location, and then stop on that which the abscess occurs and stops the inflammation; and leave this for several days; and you strengthen over the stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And they are the stars of the canna lada race, well-formed; or made from pine wood; or from palm branches; and each star should be as wide as this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But the splint that is placed over the fracture should be wider and longer in proportion to the member on which it rests; and strengthen the splint with another band according to your initial tightening; and place the other binding above it correctly, as was said about the tightening, and your tightening should be smaller near the fracture and larger further away from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be medium in thickness and flexibility, and made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of some foolish people using thick ropes to tie them, it is a great error when the tightening is not even.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not appropriate because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightening with them, and it is not necessary that there be a space of less than one finger between splints.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured by the ends of the splints near the tightening at the location, then place a layer of felt or camel's wool between them until it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are with abscess, and there is a rupture in the tendon, and I will remember it in that chapter under special circumstances.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that all broken members are not strengthened with splints on the first day; the reason being that the member, when it is large, does not require splints immediately but rather after 5 to 7 days or more, depending on your certainty of the development of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of bandaging with which the ancients restored broken bones, joints and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Common bandage method for the restoration of fractures, appropriate for complex cases and more so for women and children because it does not require warmth or moisture; take powder from ground barley and is the marrow of the millstone that you grind in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Place it like this, but if it is not like that, filter it with albumen of egg white, and complete the preparation without thickness or thinness, and use it for that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of treatment for fractures, dislocations and twists: a recipe for asafetida, lapacho, acacia, eucalyptus, myrrh and aloe vera, which is prepared from 1000 grains of salvage miller's sandalwood, 5 drams of myrrh and aloe, 20 drams of aloechil; they should be crushed and sifted, then mixed with either aloe juice or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded; and use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and confers strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of treatment for fractures and twists: a recipe for myrrh, aloe vera, white clay and eucalyptus, which is prepared with ten drams of myrrh, five drams of aloe vera, twenty drams of eucalyptus, and six drams of Armenian pitch.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are strained in a mortar with crushed alum, filtered, and mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of bandaging for separated joints and bones in their place, as well as pain in those places and cracks and fractures: take wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil and apply it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this bandage does not have the virtue of restoration, but rather of abscess, pusulation and alleviating pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of bandaging for broken bones: take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together to make a bandage.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of bandaging wrapped for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want the solution to the abscess: recipe of alum, camomile, violets, wild thyme, all in equal parts .i. All are strained and mixed with vinegar if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then place it with water of wet colander or water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of bandage with strong solution for the resolution of long-lasting abscess in the member when it is required: recipe of alum and its seeds, and balm, mellilot, marjoram, violets, camomile, all in equal parts and honey; all are strained and mixed with water of savory or sweet water or vinegar, all according to the quality of the member and the reappearance of the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken member before its restoration, except for a splint made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be neither too thick nor too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	And according to Galen, it should be placed on the broken member before its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat are such as myrrh, ambergris, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A recipe for a plaster to treat wounds and pain: grind myrtle leaves, hysop, human skin scraped or goose down feathers, and althea root, and salt, all ground together; sieve and sift it, and cook it, and make it into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the wound requires that it remain open and should be sutured, consider whether there is pain or purulence or if the bone is broken from its place; then you should not undo it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is a strong pain or purulence or inflammation at the site, then you should cut or undo it in that hour and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge dipped in warm water, immerse it in hot water, and with that wash the site until the purulence ceases and the pain is alleviated; then let it rest for an hour; and apply a linen cloth soaked in sour vinegar or oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are sure of cauterizing the abscess, and to rest the inflammation of the member, and that the pain be alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply a thin and gentle constraint and small plaster to the site without tightening it too much with your initial constriction, and gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all the symptoms are already healed, and no longer need a plaster or constraint, then you can close it as you did at the beginning of the healing process.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause on the limb of those that we have mentioned, then you should not undo it, but let it be for three or four days or more. And for some weeks everything is left as it was due to the dislocation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh heals over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then you should adjust the constraint more than in your initial constriction and tighten the clothing of the patient according to the swelling of the limb as memory dictates.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the site of the fracture is already dry and extended more than necessary, then know that nourishment should not reach it; so wrap it in hot water for all observation periods, and this should be done for three days; and gradually loosen the constraint, and through this action bring the nourishment to the limb, and heal it slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	What the foolish restorers of the fractured limb do after a period when it is not restored at the beginning, as required, and is restored incorrectly, according to their operation, and great fear, if this were correct they would have increased what the ancients wrote in their books and practiced.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by blows to the bone, and the blow completely breaks the bone from within, which is called comminuted; or the blow cuts a part of the bone and the wound cuts the flesh but does not pass through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound in these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or traction; and its cause is a blow with a hammer or by falling on stones, and similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the panniculus that is behind the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the wound in these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is a type of fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the fineness of the hair-like fissures, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	A fracture that is caused by falling or hitting a stone, and similar, which causes one layer of the bone to split at the joints from within, and it occurs in concave areas such as when it happens to the kneecaps when they are hit and split from the inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And moreover, this occurs in bones that are soft, such as infant skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these types of fractures, they are like scattered stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I will return to the memory of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we should know all these types of fracture by detection on them and investigation of them with tests and the examination of rotten flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special type of capillary is recognized because it appears on the bone, is drained, and coagulates over it when it becomes black, as a fracture appears.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one should first consider the patient's symptoms, and if you find signs that indicate fear such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, inflammation or redness of the joints and similar symptoms in the larger context, one doubts whether it will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you find unusual symptoms, you hope for health, then you begin treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you to treat it at the beginning as it comes in winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the bone structure before the twelfth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you take care of the bone before the seventh day, knowing that the bone will be rotten by the panniculus, and accidents may occur as we have advised.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is divided into small pieces and crushed, then it is necessary that you open up the compressed and fragmented part, as I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient with the injury, and you open up on the bone according to your custom and as you can, following the figure of the wound, and be gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens that you must examine the bone, discharge blood or an abscess, then you should proceed with what is necessary, and it is that you apply warm cloths soaked in wine and rose oil to the wound, and let it rest until the abscess subsides, and be sure of discharging blood; and begin with the examination of the bone and removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you open up the bone with a straight saw-like instrument, and this is its form: Take another saw of similar size; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply more the saw than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is necessary that you have a number of saws of different sizes, some of which are longer than others; and some of them should be shorter than the others, and they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease in striking the saw to avoid damaging the head and teeth.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you drill around it before administering the saws with handles, which are called non-penetrating chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called thus because they do not reach the end of the bone to that which is at the head, so that the chisel has a rounded or tapered tip on its sharp edge resembling the rim or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take many of these chisels as needed for the thickness of each bone, until it is present at all parts of the skull where the edge is sharp, the quantity in length and width according to the thickness of that bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of chisels: The quality of drilling around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and rotate it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the chisel to another place, and place what is between all the way through the thickness of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then open up the bone with saws between each crack, and do it as finely as possible at the end of delicacy, as we have said, until you break the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause using instruments that you will prepare for this, such as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	It is necessary that you be careful so that the incision does not touch any cause of the hernia.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	When you perforate the bone, if it is continuous with the hernia and separated from it, and you have to extract that part, it is necessary to cut and round off that part on the edge of the bone using a tool similar to an incision, but nonetheless it is necessary that it be very sharp and very thin compared to other incision tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any small fragment of the bones remains and adheres, then take it with ease using what you have of tools; and apply ointment and poultice to the wound which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is easy and distant from fear, which we call guillotine and the name is praised greatly; and this is the meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the fracture part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most visible and manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed a cushion under the end of the incision tool, which has the following form (long and curved):
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It is true that the semi-lunar fracture is round and does not cut any cause, while the acute fracture is in two directions advancing in length, as sometimes; so that the semi-lunar fracture should be adjacent to the hernia with its rounded edge cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the incision tool against one part of the bone with a small hammer until you have cut the entire bone with ease, and you should be confident in the padding that no accident will occur in any way; and if the patient were the most foolish man among all men and the most ignorant about medicine, certainly, he would be asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then, if any cause is attached to the bone of the padding in some locations of the bone, cut that part with the rounded tip of the incision tool, and remove it easily, as it has been freed from harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the padding, and what is detached or remains attached to the bone is the surface, and it remains rough and subtle protrusions, then you must cut that roughness and remove those subtle protrusions with sharp razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all locations as most conveniently and correctly according to where you lose your operation of the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	It is necessary that you use the razor with which you cut the bone at first on the most subtle part of it, and do not stop doing so until you reach the point of administering the very thin layer and the very subtle part of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any case of small vein-like fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you lost at correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because it cannot be reduced in all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Stand on what we have shown about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the padding is rectangular when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth of the same size as the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place that on the orifices of the wound; and take another cloth doubled or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil and place that over the first cloth lightly on top of it, so as not to injure the hernia; and apply ointment sparingly over it, but not forcefully except according to the size of the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure of cautery abscess; and then remove that and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is required, such as lentils and flour, and powder of sandalwood and aristolochia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make the powder of these medicines dry on the wound, as it dries; and generally, administer all medicine with properties of which it absorbs and does not injure.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Take care according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment remains clean; and do not apply ointment or any other substance; nor leave it with putridity or anything similar; for when it is adjacent to the padding of the brain, it corrupts that and then poisons the patient, causing him great evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	If it happens in the hernia of the head, as the bone is purified and especially when the care of it is administered, and it turns black on its surface; then consider whether the patient has experienced the accidents that we have mentioned, know that it is harmful without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen blackness except from the medicine that is applied, and it is due to that medicine that such blackness occurs, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of oil. and cover that area with a cloth, and place a cure for healing on it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken in the nose but two fractures together with one of them observed, because there are two bones, and the other fracture is cartilaginous, and it does not break and will not happen to it except traction, curvature, and deviation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then it must be that you insert your little finger into its own nose and grasp that fracture inside with your thumb, and with your index finger outside, until the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let this be done for your convenience, and be careful not to hurt the patient during your treatment.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the little finger does not reach it, then it must be aligned with the end of the thumb where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, you should do what was said above.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply the restoration to it in the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then wait for the seventh or tenth days to rest the cauterized wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a small piece of cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two tweezers, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be with the thickness of a sufficient amount to fill the cleft of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And as the ancient restorers said, the tweezers should be wrapped in thread and tied throughout the day, but I do not see this; however, it must be that the piece of cloth is wrapped in hog's fat with powdered millstone, and leave it in until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes insert your fingers into the nose instead of tweezers, in case the little finger is not available because it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose very strong and the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, use tweezers.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another wound cauterized, fill the nose with beeswax or cotton stuffed with vinegar oil or diacylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no cauterized wound, you must fill it outside with sieved flour and powdered charcoal mixed with hog's fat, and place a lion-skin cloth over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, you must cut it open, extract those bones using instruments suitable for them; and sew up the incision, heal it with what nourishes and consolidates, and use the appropriate filler.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a wound occurs inside the nose, you must heal it with tweezers and administer leaden cannula until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by an open wound, then examine it to see if the fracture is only on the outside, and whether it is not broken in two and curved towards the inside partitions, then its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is in the right side, you must insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and press gently against the swelling of the fracture towards the inside partitions with the other hand from the outside, while pushing evenly on that area.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, you must administer extension of the two sides according to rectitude until it is possible for them to be aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is shaking of teeth to dislocation, then stabilize those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or ivory; and place a beeswax on the broken jaw, and place a double cloth, and place a large piece of felt well made, or one piece of sola the length of the jaw, over it, and place it appropriately depending on how the healing of it is prepared and what the application requires, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And tell the patient to rest and take a calm diet, and stop giving them sour foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then wait until the third day and remove it; afterwards, correct what has been altered and apply powder of milled oregano, album of egg white, or flour of camomile, as you will have left the wound open, and let it heal with woolen lamb's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Keep that plaster attached to it and, if the bone's disposition is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for this fracture is usually tightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another swelling appears as an abscess, administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed, and let the abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is ulcerated, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or shattered, then be careful to remove those shattered pieces with the appropriate instrument.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the orifices of the ulcer are narrow, you should widen them with a blunt probe according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have removed those shattered pieces and no pus has flowed out of them, widen the orifices of the ulcer if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the dressings suitable for this purpose on it and pack it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Usually a broken clavicle breaks at the junction of the bone, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, separated, or separated into two pieces that do not shatter; and this is easy to restore; or it happens like this when the bone shatters, making restoration difficult; or the fracture occurs with an ulcer.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation when the fracture is without an ulcer is that you have two assistants present; one will hold the broken clavicle and follow it, while the other extends the neck to that junction.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with your thumbs until the bone shape is correct and neither protrude too much nor have a concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, cover the patient's hand with fabric or wool and let its size correspond to your need; extend, lift, and bend the clavicle and hold the hand with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the junctions outside, because it is prevented by the pronator, then have the patient lean back on their neck and place a larger cushion on the muscle of the affected side.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant presses the muscle of the affected side towards the junctions until the clavicle bone is lifted beyond the pronator and then you correct the fracture and align it with your thumbs.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel shattered bones in the clavicle and they are painful, then you must break it open and extract those shattered pieces with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, you must make an incision in it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed the clavicle chisel on the side that serves to chip; and this tool is a rod or iron with the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its shape is like a spoon with this concavity; and let its width correspond to your need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	However, the length of it should be as much as possible for the operation; it must have two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the ulcer that you have incised when you extracted the bone shatter is wide and it is certain that there is an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the ulcer with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, fill the ulcer with fabrics and powders according to the size of the ulcer's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess occurs, pour wine with vinegar and oil on it and let it rest.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	However, if the bone is tight without an ulcer or incision, place a plaster made of milled flour and egg white on it, let it rest on woolen lamb's wool, and place your hand over the patient's thumb (if necessary), and take a thread, which is long and its width should be one palm or more; place powder twice on the wool and plaster; take a thin table splint whose width is three fingers and whose length is similar; wrap it in fabric, then wrap that fabric with the splint at the site of the fracture; place salve like revolver oil on it, rotate it over the patient's neck and the thumb of the affected side, and reduce it over the entire junction; and when the tightness of the fracture with swelling descends, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And it is necessary that the splint not be harmful to the broken bone; therefore, you must observe the patient every day, as when the limb becomes soft or the swelling goes down, then you correct it and strengthen the wound.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the pillow of the patient on their neck and place the head of the patient on a small cushion; so that the neck of the affected limb may be raised, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by lifting the muscle; or the arm of the patient is tied to the neck of the affected limb.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bindings unless there is pus or an abscess in that area, for up to twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see the face of it, and adjust in the tightness and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes it is done in months of time for that purpose.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	If the shoulder blade is broken near its edge and not through it.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at that location, and if it is broken in the middle of it, but not through it, and it is not known except by touch; then according to the shape of the fracture you prepare for it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every possible way using any tools available to you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then you place powdered poplar bark mixed with alum and lion's wool on the site; and place a double layer of cloth, and then place the sharp stake of thin wood according to the size of the shoulder blade, or slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the stake is hollow in some of the locations of the shoulder blade, then you fill that concavity with lion's wool and place the stake according to its size.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen it above with long human hair and tying that is appropriate and the firmness of the stake until it is no longer swollen in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bindings every day, and in all cases when it becomes soft, loosen it again and tighten it equally if it is swollen in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Keep the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The shoulder blade is restored in twenty days or more.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when that number is complete, then you loosen the bindings and ensure that you know for sure that it is not feared or threatened by the bones from which the fracture began, nor its disintegration.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If the bone has not passed and the pus has not subsided, you cut it off, remove it, and proceed as previously described for the treatment of a collarbone fracture with an abscess or cauterization if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the foot is broken in its proper place and it heals, but sometimes the extremities of it are crushed and pulverized.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone of the foot is broken in its middle, it causes a decline into the partitions within and leads to great pain, difficulty in walking, cough, high fever, and vomiting; and it is evident in the cavities of the broken bones and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration is that the patient should be placed on his back and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press the muscles of it, adjust the costal bones to its sides, and gently handle the operation with precision and accuracy according to every possible method and what is convenient, until the figure of the bone returns.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place the plaster and wadding on it, and place a lightweight wooden or hollow stick of similar nature on top of it, then you wrap that in cloth; and handle the broken bone gently so as not to harm it; and go along with the curvature of the backbone occasionally, strengthen it with appropriate compression, and consider the tension at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if there is the necessity to remove the plaster due to corrosion or pain, or an abscess that occurs in that place, then you cut and loosen it and remove the platter and correct anything caused by it with curative methods; and then adjust the plaster, if necessary, and apply appropriate compression until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in thick places where they are adjacent to each other; and at their extremities from the partition front, this is caused not by contraction but due to cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of this is not concealed from sensation, you must examine it with the questions.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be so that you guide the fracture with questions according to the possible method, until it is united as necessary, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a stick, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines into the partitions within, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture, similar to puncture in those who have wept, and this is due to the bones being covered with linen; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were cunning in that with many schemes.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said that: it is necessary to place food for the patient that generates inflammation and wind, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the partitions outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should avoid that for it not to be a light cause for generating dangerous abscesses, if not necessary; and if necessary, then help with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of them said that it should be placed on windy ground and that it should be squeezed with force; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wind draws excess towards the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the place should be covered with wool that is immersed in oil of myrrh, and powders placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the tension is guided when wrapping it according to curvature; and cure the patient with treatment for pleurisy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if a patient experiences intense pressure that he cannot bear and the bone is pierced with linen through puncture, you fear for him; then it is necessary to cut open the place, expose the broken rib, and place an instrument to preserve the cavity, the memory of which has been mentioned before, and to divide the bones easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitching and treat it with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If there is an internal abscess, then you cut and pour powder in roasted oil on it and place a plaster over the place, and cure the patient with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And be placed on a bed on which he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they adhere to each other, and similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when something similar occurs and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider whether its limbs are already softened and stiffened and dead and cannot move nor strengthen them and when you constrict them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healed, and in the month of dispositions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they move and feel constriction with fingers and piercing, then you know that the neck of the bones is saved and that the patient can recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling something and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the feet of it.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Here comes the second sentence to translate: Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Here comes the third sentence: Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	Here comes the fourth sentence: E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the fifth sentence: E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sixth sentence: E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Here comes the seventh sentence: Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the eighth sentence: E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.
Capitol .x.	The eighth sentence doesn't have any translation. It seems to be just the title of a new section (capitol in this case) which means "Chapter X" or "Tenth Chapter". Without the context, it is hard to provide a full and accurate translation.
De restauracio de la ancha.	The ninth sentence doesn't have any translation either, as it appears to just be the title of another section (de restauracio de la ancha in this case), meaning "On the Restoration of the Ankle". Without more context, it is difficult to provide a full and accurate translation.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Here comes the tenth sentence: Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Here comes the eleventh sentence: E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Here comes the twelfth sentence: E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Here comes the thirteenth sentence: Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquella fractura.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Here comes the fourteenth sentence: E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the fifteenth sentence: E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is subdued, and you place something on top of it as prescribed; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it in this way as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If a fracture or broken bone occurs, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ankle bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The ankle bone is what is between the heel and the shoulder of the arm.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat pieces of moderately coarse millstone in this manner:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And place them at the two extremities of two pieces of linen, and then suspend them from a raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient over a chair, and place their broken arm on the millstone pieces until it reaches the handle in the appropriate location where its curve is attached to the millstone.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Suspend it from some heavy object, or else the servant extends it to the sides; and let the doctor and his assistant hold the broken bone with their hands until the fracture returns as necessary.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their hand from the neck with a piece of linen; then command two servants, one of whom holds something over the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the swelling below it; each extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with two pieces of linen, and on each side with another piece of linen; and each servant extends to their sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then you must place a part of the linen on the handle and the other over the bone where it joins the heel.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	In the same way, if the fracture is close to the heel, then you must place the linen over that location and over the heel.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap it with ease and without effort, and then when it is tied as necessary and applied well, strengthen it if there is no abscess present.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the wrapping for six days, and place on top of it linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides; then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening it is to apply a plaster to the fracture, then cover it with linen wrapping over the plaster; and adjust the arm on that ankle bone, and place your hand under the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Cover the linen and strengthen the ankle bone with the arm so that the arm is in place, unless there is some reason for this due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	This is that you place over the fracture a splint that is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of the finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen the splints with the bandage as described at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your bandage over the location of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the bandage should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see the position of the stars and the constriction as we said at the time when you are restoring the member to its proper position, then do you make (the procedure).
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is a cauterized abscess, then you leave the constriction and the stars in for seven days as we said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent inflammation or pressure at the site; or food is forbidden to reach the member due to the surplus of constriction; and so do everything as we said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Let the patient's bed be on their back, and let their hands be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a hot compress filled with wool on the fracture and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken member must not be separated nor dissolved; or that the ligature is softened, so do everything as you see fit.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The patient's food should be according to the order we gave before, in such a way that the food is subtle at first and then becomes stronger; and so it is necessary to coarsen the food for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the compress and blanket of him to be strong for forty days, and so it is necessary that they are removed and a bath is given, and he is treated with enemas which remedy that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is shallow, then do not remove the ligature and stitches until three days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones that are called two focal points; one of which is small and it is the one mentioned above near the elbow, and the other is large and it is the one placed below the small one, from the inner side of the elbow.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone (focal point) is broken or if both are fractured.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the smaller bone (focal point) above is broken, the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is more rapid.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the bone (focal point) below is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Worse still is when two bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, it is appropriate for the physician to pause with a small extension in order to make the healing easier.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone (focal point) is fractured, you must pause with a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones (focal points) are fractured, you must pause the reduction less forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You must pause the figure of the hand during the restoration and extension of it, with the palm facing upwards as we said before; the thumb should be positioned above the other fingers, as well as what has been said before; the earlobe should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a low couch.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	There should be a pillow in front of him at the height or incline of his head to prevent him from exerting himself.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The assistant should extend the arm from above with his hand or ligature and another assistant should do the same from below in the same manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The physician should hold the bone until it is reduced according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If there are any shards of the bone, you should make a thorough reduction at the site with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If a piece of the bone appears separated that cannot be reunited and is not in your hope for its restoration, you should make an incision on it and remove it as we said before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with a wound, we have already given you special instructions on that matter, and so take care of it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you should line a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax that is neither too thick nor too thin; strengthen the cloth over the abscess with a gentle pressure using a subtle reduction until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply an emulsion prepared from powdered moly and clover oil, and place stitches; the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be sharp and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You should know that the number of stitches for an arm is determined by the major positioning (disposition), or whether the fracture is in one bone (focal point) or in two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	You should pause your reduction over the site of the fracture with strong and forceful pressure; when it is necessary to extend to parts above or below the fracture, pause the reduction a little less firmly as we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist; they should not be hard or rough, and the thread used for suturing should be of moderate thickness as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the ligature for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any reason for which correction is necessary such as inflammation occurring in the member, you must suture the member with hot water until it subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And you must release the limb until it relaxes again, and return the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stiffness has been softened and the bone has returned to its normal state, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more carefully if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, for then you must soften it slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment returns, and apply heat to it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes mentioned earlier, then there is no need to fast for more than about twenty days or so around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then have the patient's hand suspended by its strength of movement, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture heals in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it can heal more quickly in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexion and the application of your skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	This is the title of the chapter. It translates to "On the healing of a finger fracture and dislocations."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that when a finger is fractured or the joints of the knuckles are dislocated, it does not heal without proper treatment.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a finger fracture or dislocation, the patient must follow a diet appropriate to his condition and rest it on a pillow in an extended position, with the hand of the affected limb resting on top of it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then apply an extender to the broken bones, and the doctor should align them correctly with a good fit.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	You must apply plaster and dressing if there is no abscess, but if an abscess occurs, pierce it with a probe according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the fracture is within the palm, you should hold the back of the hand and make a bandage of fabric, instructing the patient to hold their injured hand in place with their other hand; bind it tightly with long fabric.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The probe should be made of leather with some slack, so that the probe can be applied to the palm and bound according to necessity.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is outside the palm, you must bind the probe and another probe from the injured area to the back of the hand, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind the affected area as it would be when bound to the forearm with linen strips.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles, you should bind it as required if it is a push fracture, and hold it in place with the palm while binding it; if desired, use a small straight probe to elevate the fracture and prevent it from healing incorrectly.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in one of the other knuckles (such as the middle finger joint, index finger joint, ring finger joint, or little finger joint), bind it and apply the necessary splint to immobilize it; or use a continuous bandage for the entire length of the finger, which is better; or use a small probe on top of it, as described in the case of the push fracture.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In your healing process, also consider the appearance of an abscess and its opposite (opposition) using the appropriate procedure, as well as what is necessary when any of these occurrences happen, according to the narrative provided.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	This is the title of the chapter. It translates to "On the healing of a hip bone fracture."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	A broken and dislocated hipbone is identified by its appearance, which resembles the part above and above the pubic bone.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration (of the patient) is done in such a way that the plaster (or bandage) is strengthened over the fracture and another plaster removed from the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then extend the entire plaster to its limit according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone. (Note: "liament" refers to the plaster or bandage used for healing.)
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the thigh, then the plaster should be close to the edge at the end of the thigh, so that its extension covers it, and another plaster removed from the fracture. (Note: "pentenilh" refers to the thigh bone or femur.)
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is close to the edge, then make the plaster close to the edge and extend it to the sides. (Note: This suggests that when the fracture is near the end of a bone, the plaster should be placed closer to the end and extended further out to provide support.)
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should put both hands inside and reduce the bone according to its natural shape, so that it is joined well; at this point, you must stop plastering and applying tight bandages, unless there is an abscess in the limb. (Note: This suggests that the doctor should manipulate the broken bone back into its correct position before applying a plaster or bandage, but if there is an infection present, they should not apply the plaster or bandage to prevent further spread of the infection.)
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an abscess, leave it for several days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your care. (Note: This suggests that if there is an infection present, they should not apply the plaster or bandage immediately but wait for the infection to subside before continuing treatment.)
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done in this way: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it over two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg and the swelling of the thigh. (Note: This suggests that the hard bandage should be tightly wrapped around the fracture site and the affected limb to provide support and prevent movement.)
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long iron rod between the thigh and the leg near the edge on both sides, and bring the ends of the rod from above both sides, and then turn it around the leg and thigh so that any excess bandage wraps over it. (Note: This suggests that an iron rod should be inserted between the thigh and the leg to provide additional support during treatment.)
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place a splint on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place another splint over the bone of the leg. (Note: This suggests that a splint should be used to immobilize the affected limb during treatment.)
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the void between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bleeding stops. (Note: This suggests that the affected area should be filled with soft cloths to stop any bleeding or oozing of fluid.)
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Begin with a strong bandage over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the plaster at the site of the fracture, your bandaging should be less tight and more loose and moist. (Note: This suggests that the affected area should be tightly wrapped initially, but as the plaster approaches the fracture site, it should be loosened to allow for swelling and healing.)
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the iron rod to both ends of the leg on both sides as far as it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints of the other limb so that the plaster does not move from its position. (Note: This suggests that the affected limb should be immobilized with splints at both ends to prevent movement during treatment.)
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Leave the bandaging in this way so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation and resembles those; if any of these occurrences happen, then remove the plaster immediately, and correct everything appropriately, according to what has been said previously. (Note: This suggests that the bandage should be applied in a way that does not cause infection or inflammation, and if any complications arise, they should be addressed immediately.)
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a bone tumor present, you must remove it as much as possible; and if it cannot be completely removed, cut off the surrounding area, and treat with what was previously mentioned until it heals. (Note: This suggests that if there is a tumor in the bone, it should be removed as much as possible, but if complete removal is not possible, the affected area should be surgically excised and treated.)
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some weeks are stronger than this thigh fracture, as mentioned in the advice and in the arm. (Note: This suggests that the healing process for certain types of fractures, such as those in the thigh or arm, may take longer than others.)
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this type, the patient should not experience limping; if it is only restored, and another limb is not applied, then limping is necessary for the one that is always used. (Note: This suggests that in some cases, a patient may need to use crutches or a walking aid on their unaffected leg to compensate for the immobilized affected limb during recovery.)
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the illness [gout] lasts for 40 days or a little more or a little less, and all this is according to the diversity of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	The following lines seem to belong to a different section of the text, perhaps another capital (section) in the treatise:
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The following lines seem to belong to a different section of the text, perhaps another capital (section) in the treatise:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The following lines appear to belong to the same section as the previous translation:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is not only a break but also a tear in the bone parts, and this is a plague or multiple plagues, and over all this the pain is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the bone is such that it must be brought together so that what has been broken from its parts is joined and aligned as much as possible by means of traction, padding, and fabrication (or splinting).
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a plaster (or bandage) and apply it over the round stone (if necessary); and press firmly with a strap (or bandage) around it (as appropriate).
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that have been recommended in other fractures, such as the use of an apotemum (an ointment or salve) and similar substances that may be applied to prevent infection and promote healing at the site of the fracture until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	The following lines appear to be a new section heading in the text:
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The following lines appear to belong to a different section of the text:
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The following lines appear to belong to the same section as the previous translation:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It happens to some of the species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, restoration is made in this way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken together, the cavity becomes completely divided.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is broken finely, the cavity becomes partially divided in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the bone is broken coarsely, it breaks that one off, and this is due to one of the causes not being alleviated.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, alignment, and ligature of the splinters as per that method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, it is important if the fracture of the cavity has many complications, that the extension be smaller and more gentle, and alleviate with your power.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the cavity is some cause for operation on the arm, and this occurs when you plug the splinters and complete all the procedure, then you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed at the causes that have been treated on soles, and these are made in the same way with palm branches; align them according to small roughness, and they should not be jagged, and their length according to the length of the cavity, and from the neck to the wrist.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the division of the cavity of one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the neck to the wrist of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then bind the two splinters in three places of both ends and at the middle location, because with this structure the cavity is prevented from closing on the left and right side, and this is good positioning.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	A brace of wood has already been administered according to the length of the cavity, and it should be placed there to prevent movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Moreover, you must do this in a fracture, and when that is truly a wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the fracture every day and study it more deeply, and you must protect it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then you oppose yourself to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not every heel suffers from fracture; but some bones of the foot suffer fracture; and in the toes only occasional fractures occur, and they do not occur except by excessive movement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot break and sometimes those bones rise up between them, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared in this way (as with a splint).
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press, bind, and hold it in place until it returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and stopper on top of it, and place under the foot a small table with two flat heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen it with the foot in the correct position, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes for which it is necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you remove the ligament because you will find the bones bound, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in these is done in the same way as we mentioned above.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	However, if some toes are broken, then you restore them, bind them in the same way as I recommend to you in the restoration of fingers on the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken toe splinter according to the length of the toe, and it should be slightly curved inward; and under the foot place this table that I have recommended to you, and strengthen it with correct positioning.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	However, if the fracture of the bones is two or three or more, then you place a splint according to the size of each toe wrapped in linen cloth on each toe, and strengthen the table under the heel of the foot, and stand it on one of the heads of the table so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to remember that you do not forget all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures due to accidents we have mentioned; and oppose yourself to all accidents that are necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hump of the woman and the bone of the pubic arch and the buttock of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hump of the woman is broken, you let it heal in a hanging position, and incline it to the opposite side slightly, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the hump with cotton, and it should be done in the hump in this way as expected; and the woman is shaken, and the hips are raised slightly, because all this is forgotten until it comes forward to the opposite side of the hump as expected and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on the hips, and when it is time to urinate, remove the cottons with ease and urinate, then reduce and return it in the same way as you placed it at the beginning, and then return the powder first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Make an opening in this manner for seven days or around that time, as it will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take an ovine bladder and force a canal made of reed through it; insert the entire bladder into the cavity and inflate the canal with air until the bladder is distended within the cavity, as the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it in place for several days as prescribed until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the pelvis in males or females are fractured, administer in their restoration and treatment of the hip bone what has been prescribed for the bone of the pelvis.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	That which is right should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that do not require much effort, especially to one who has some knowledge, study, use, and understanding of this book; for that fracture indicates to you the greatest dispositions towards righteousness in their restoration and stricture, therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of the male's broken tailbone, take guarguamela root and place it on the fracture; then cover it with cloth and wrap it up, let it rest for three days or around that time, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of restoration of bone fractures when infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who has suffered a fracture with infection, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or shoulder, or similar to it, that you cauterize and probe it as soon as the conditions for cauterization or probing are present as stated above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection discharges pus, you must take measures to retain it until you pulverize gold dust over it, unless there is another reason.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin the restoration of the fracture on that day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cauterized, you must let the restoration wait for up to nine days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day and thereafter, as you will cause harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin exposed, you must perforate it and reduce the fracture with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the situation with your hands, you must reduce it with these tools; this tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the infection; and this is necessary for the physician who will take three or four according to the amount required in the treatment of all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round, and be slightly coarse in size to avoid the compression of the fracture during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be of sharp edges with a margin at the ends; the upper end should be thicker and from the middle towards the fractures.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called "labre voluntary pallet" in Greek, so it is a small flat piece of bone.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore the end of it must be placed slightly elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Insert it once into a wound until the bone is reduced and set properly.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore force the fracture ends together, and if the broken end is thin, do not use the tool for good reason, but you must insert the end of the bone until the tool can grip it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been prescribed, then insert it using what is necessary for the chisels which we have mentioned, or it can be with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove that part which remains rough and full of small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone has been reduced and the patient experiences intense pain quickly, you must understand that the bone has not returned to its natural location; and thus do what will give great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete and you have placed a black stiptic cloth over it, do not apply any oil to the infection or other cause in which there is ointment, as this will cause putridity and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Approximately administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound exposed only as much as necessary, to incise it with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be careful not to stretch the wound with force, for many times ignorant physicians have caused death or severe illness or amputation in their patients, as this leads to healing.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the patient's wound is loose, soft and different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or bad and you fear the risk of a bad outcome, and pain occurs at the site, it is not necessary to place stitches there, but rather apply a hard bandage in place of stitches and tighten it with that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the wound begins about one or two days later, which is caused by a blow, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it and apply warm compresses, as it is our custom to treat wounds, such as warm compresses like tetrapotassium and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is important that the limb is prepared in such a way that the purulence flows from it to the joints nearby with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound persists for many days and is not consolidated or does not abscess from the blow, then you must realize that this is a complication of the small vessels, so examine the wound with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	If those complications that are separated and extracted do not occur, and those that are not separated and place the limb and cause pain, then you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound becomes gangrenous or rotten, this is a symptom or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to place a poultice on one of them according to what is appropriate for its healing, which is preceded by a narrative in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what needs the most attention and you present your case: when large bones are broken, raise the limb in the same way as the bones of the thigh and similar ones of large members, without presuming traction or extraction of it, for many times this leads to death; leave it inside until it can be moved, for a strong limb may fall apart within two to thirty days. And you take care of the wound if you have seen it, and do not leave it untreated.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX:
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of a node that occurs in the trace of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This node often occurs in the trace of healing from a fracture, and more frequently near joints, and it is caused by the figure of the limb; strong limbs prohibit their natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider whether the node is recent and administer medications that have astringent properties such as alum, tannins, and others; take some or all of these, and compress them with vi stiptic or album of huou or other astringents, and place it on the node in a cloth, and press it firmly around it for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the extraction that does not loosen it for many days; and remove it after the node is gone; or press firmly on a lead sheet tightly, as lead has the property of holding everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the node has become hard and tight and necessitates removing it constantly, then you should cut it along the most superior part of it, and excise the excess and protruding portions or remove it with forceps until it is gone; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	In restoration of a fracture, when it is restored and remains limb subtle and free following its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains limb subtle and free, it does not happen except for multiple causes: one of which is an excess of solution of the ligament and the ligature made not according to what is needed; or due to superfluity of tightness of the ligaments before nutriment is prohibited from running to the member; or due to excessive embrocaccio [a type of bandaging or splinting]; or due to movement superfluent not in its time; or due to small amount of blood in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender before the blood is multiplied in them, and administer baths, and give warm and sweet food and comfort over him/her.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place plaster on the limb, so that the plaster draws to it the nourishment, or continue the bandaging of him/her with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation on them is forbidden what is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a limb that has been restored appears to lack healing of its crookedness and prominence at the broken bone and nodule, and it is due to the shape of the member, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should take the word of the one who states that the limb was newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be condemned as leading to great fear of the sign of which death is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limpness and nodule are recent, then it is necessary that they be bandaged with warm water in which are placed soft herbs soothing, such as althea leaves and razor roots, and mellilot, and similar to these; and it should be made into a plaster with plaster of mollicificatio, or the mucillage of razor root althea is prepared and rubbed with the gray of gualina or oil of camphor, and it is plastered with that; or the figs are soaked in oil and crushed with the pomegranate seeds, and similar to these of the medicines called amermans consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by persistent light friction that is with the most humid, and movement of the member should be administered in all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if crookedness has already advanced far and is made strong and turned into stone and necessitated cure of it by iron, then it is necessary that the pus above be cauterized and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what superfluous of nodule in it should be removed with fine cutters and administered ease to him/her with solicitude and care.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially of one of the joints of its place, which is forbidden to move, and distorts the shape of the limb, and brings pain and great injuries upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when an accident occurs with a dislocation, it is necessary to do so immediately and not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes necrotic and difficult reduction of dislocation becomes very difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not good nor stretched out at the time of the necrosis, because many times brings spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, it is necessary that you take the flap of the patient's skin, and let it be cauterized before the necrosis subsides; and the limb should be bandaged with warm water and oil, and the reduction should be made with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all the member should be healed by the means that will come in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have now and ordered the chapters of dislocation as it was before in the fracture; from the upper division of the body to the lower part of it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the cure of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated and not straightened; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are brought back to their places with little movement and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated and closed, until they are mollified at the juncture until the saliva of the patient flows and he/she cannot keep it nor close his/her mouth, and the tongue of him/her is enveloped in its socket.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation of it is slight, then with the greatest care it should be returned to its place by itself when there is little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and closed, it is necessary that reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the attendant should hold the head of the patient, and enter his/her thumb into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth if the dislocation is of one part; or that he/she enters both thumbs together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the others should be outside with which he/she guides it; and commands the patient to cease his/her jaws and release them from going in any direction; and the doctor should guide the jaw and cover the jaw with a piece of cloth until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are dislocated, then administer an emulsified solution of hot water and oil until it becomes easy to reduce both, and do not delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they have been returned and closed, the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it on those small pieces of woolen cloth with chalk, make it from beeswax and rubbed oil; and apply it gently to facilitate and loosen the closing.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The patient should sleep on their back, with the head placed between two pillows to prevent it from turning to either side; do not force any cause of nausea upon them; when their pain is reduced and the mandibles are in place, then you may move them as desired.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	This should be administered gently and not force the opening of the mouth; you must maintain their food and drink, and rest until the mandible is set and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of both mandibles, when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, is difficult, then observe carefully for fevers and constant sweating, and it is strong to provoke vomiting with pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you should know it is a disaster; and carefully observe that the one to whom this happens will die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the inside through its continuity with the breastbone; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which can be determined by examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of this is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your hand with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a plaster and small pieces of cloth over it, and firmly apply pressure to that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, if the end of that which is connected to it is not dislocated at any time, it should be reduced and closed as we have said and as you are equipped.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place that plaster, small pieces of cloth and bandage over it, and command the patient to rest in quiet until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	This method of treatment reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocation in the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the armpit to the lower side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, but this is rare; and it is not dislocated at the back of the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Furthermore, it is dislocated and protrudes at the lower sides of the armpits, especially in those with little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it protrudes outwardly with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow or fall can cause it to occur in some men, and the muscle of that person is cut off by cauterization, and treated with what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should examine this carefully before proceeding with treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation of this is known when it occurs at the lower sides of the armpits; therefore you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undamaged one, for there are clear signs of difference; and examine the head of the muscle for a concavity on top and the touch of its head at the end of the armpit like a hump, and when the patient cannot reduce their hand to their elbow or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated toward the breastbone or inwardly, you should examine it carefully and not be misled.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of this is that the attendant raises the hand to the upper sides, and holds their hands at the lower end of the dislocation, and raises the joint upward with strength to its place, and the attendant raises the hand, and extends it upwards, and holds it there because it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	However, if it does not return by the method we have described, and the dislocation has just occurred, wait several days, and then the patient should be bathed in hot water and embrocation made of marshmallow, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should be placed on their back and held at the lower end of the dislocation with a cloth that is neither too loose nor too tight, and the doctor should place his foot on the shoulder, lift the head of the muscle upward, pull the hand of the patient toward the upper sides so it is not displaced again, and another attendant should hold the head of the patient, who should not be displaced toward the lower sides, as it will soon return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce [the hernia] in this manner: it is that you make a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side of the affected one, enters his muscle underneath and tickles the patient's hernia, lifting it towards the incision above until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lightweight, then it is necessary that the one who causes it be suspended, so that gravity helps, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It is reduced in the same way by another method: it is that a long pole with its head rounded like the shape of a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, is placed next to the patient; then, fabric cloth lions are placed on top of the pole's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, with his hand extended on one side and the other person extends his body from the opposite side with force, because the joint returns quickly to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, then use this cure: it is that you take a pole whose length is two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness is relieved at the end of the tip in this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Fabric cloth lions are placed over the rounded head to avoid hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The tip is placed next to the patient's hernia and his hand or arm is extended over the pole towards the opposite side, and the pole is tied with ropes to the helper and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The arm is placed on a step of stairs according to its width, and the hand is extended towards the opposite side, while the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint will return quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Once the intestine is inserted as completely as possible in any manner that is available to you, then it is necessary that you place a linen bandage around the hernia; and apply a plaster prepared with powder of milled alum on top of the muscle, so that it is rolled over, and apply strong pressure below the hernia with a strap; and the ligament is wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's hand is connected to his neck, and it is left, and no damage should be done to the patient's hand for 7 days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary that the food of the patient be reduced, until the member is comfortable, because it helps the healing process more quickly.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And give less food for 7 or 5 days and exercise movement; and if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated several times due to humidity that occurs in it or for some other reason, then in that case, cautery with three strokes should be administered, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and the ligament is removed after 7 days and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and strap are reduced on it several times, but it is still not closed, and the catheter cannot raise the arm above the incision, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been severed or extended or softened, and you should understand that the joint will never be able to return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The dislocation of that one is caused by the feet and the breast or the hips behind it, the reduction is done with a push and extension to the maximum until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Another strap should be administered in that one, and care for it until it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If there is gravity or delay in the member's healing or movement, then the patient should use hot baths several times until the gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front of the back, and the dislocation of it is not relieved by any position or touch according to a certain shape, and when you adjust the displaced shoulder correctly, it is clearly manifested that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it with its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you must catch it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess cauterized, because if it reaches a cauterized abscess, reducing it is difficult, and recovery is incomplete; moreover, when it occurs at the back, it is worse for all other types of dislocations, and more painful, and more often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it is extended with both arms, and the arm is stretched out, and the hands of the doctor are on the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the blade of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in front, it returns by bending the arm with its own hand until it hits the shoulder with the blade of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two servants extend the arms, and let them have the same position so that there is no resistance to the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Approach the arm should be rolled up entirely, as it is wrapped in long doubled cloth around its hand or bandaged.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help alleviate the cause of pain and increase lubrication in the joint, then approach and push the joint firmly until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction should be stopped on that plaster where there is stiffness and hardness with albumen of egg, and it should be extracted with a descending force, the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you remove the bandage from there and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not strong, you should loosen the plaster and bandage, leave it for some days until it is extracted, then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is gravity in the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, administer humectation in bathing and gentle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or rest on the joint for a few days, so that it can heal itself; then tie it up and leave it on the bones for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove it and put it in the bath; when it becomes warm, you should massage the joint with tempered friction, and then re-apply it, which is a movement of the roller, once, twice, and thrice,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has occurred inside the denouement, until it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place it on the soft and scalded cowhide wound with sewing and press it; and do this several times, as it is wet and reduces itself to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but on the contrary for other joints, however it requires speed in the reduction at the time of dislocation, before it becomes fixed or a cauterization occurs at the site.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and extend their arm, then place your hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and push it back into its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been left in the center of the hand, in which case you should place the patient's hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by this, then you should place the patient's hand in the intrinsic position on the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, press it with a plaster allowing the site to heal and leave it; do not reapply it, as otherwise, it will cause pain or you may not be able to work on the reduction for some days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint returns according to its curvature; and do not tell the patient any cause, but let their hand become softened and unable to strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and do not be cautious in this matter except when it is strengthened with a strong cautery for the healing of the site.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the shoulder is returned, press it with the plaster that has been recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; then remove it and let the patient rest and exercise their arm.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the shoulder remains and there is gravity in it, you should soften it with hot water and massage it for several times until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in various parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger of those is dislocated at the base or center of it, you should squeeze the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the finger's head, and suspend the part to which it is dislocated, and let it rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it straightens on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, let it rest according to the narrative, and do not cease to remove it during the day and exercise it with movement, and leave it at night; and do this for several days until it strengthens.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same for a dislocation of the wrist, and place it in that position, and perform the same first operation until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do as you would for when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a spine or neck vertebrae becomes dislocated and other vertebrae are also displaced along with it, that is not treatable because death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this condition is that the patient's excretion is outside their will and they cannot retain it; and in many cases, some limbs or legs or arms, or one of them are swollen or affected by paralysis, or a vertebra has been dislocated from its place. In many cases, this means that the vertebra has moved and the patient is experiencing paralysis in four different areas.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been dislocated in the rear area and is called sciatica. (This line appears to be an interpretation or explanation of the condition discussed earlier.)
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment of this condition is to consider whether sciatica occurs in childhood because in such cases, there is neither cure nor recovery for it. (This line appears to be a continuation of the previous explanation or interpretation.)
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in cases that occur from an accident or blow, or similar to those, the Ancients have described many ways of treatment at length, but I shall summarize it here as succinctly as possible, for brevity's sake; nevertheless, I have abbreviated this treatment method by omitting much of the detail, using more straightforward language to make the explanation clearer. With that said, I will now describe and elaborate on the instruments used in this method.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	It is stated that in sciatica that occurs in the front of the legs, there is neither treatment nor recovery for it; similarly, this applies to cases where it affects both legs. (This line appears to be a continuation of the previous explanation or interpretation.)
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Only that type of sciatica is treated which occurs in the back, as I will recommend. (This line appears to be a conclusion or summary of the discussion about treatment for sciatica.)
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient should be laid flat on their back and propped up with cushions or pillows to prevent the feet from touching the ground. (This line appears to describe a position for the patient during treatment of sciatica.)
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A straight stick should be placed beneath the head at its foot end, and another stick under the feet at the other end of the bed. (This line appears to describe additional equipment or positioning for the patient during treatment of sciatica.)
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The caregiver should hold the stick, and neither should it be fixed in place; another caregiver should hold the other according to this positioning. (This line appears to describe the roles of the attendants during treatment of sciatica.)
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Cover the patient's head with a cloth and tuck it in securely to keep it from falling; extend the end of the bandage to the stick that supports the head, and tie it there; and tightly bind the other bandage around the patient's waist, covering their lower back, and make sure the sheets are straight; and adjust all the bandages so they are tied together to the stick that supports the feet. (This line appears to describe further details for positioning and securing the patient during treatment of sciatica.)
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Approach the minister and extend the ligament to the division of the thigh, but do not let the two thighs and the ligaments in their places where they are inserted remain unbound, but rather loosen them slightly, but not as firmly as has been said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns (or he places a board over that area and adjusts the patient's feet onto the board until it returns).
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	However, if it does not return in this way, then take a board whose length or width is three cubits, and carve into the wall near the patient a hole in which to insert the end of the board.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then the thickness of the board is placed on the spine and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and squeezes it tightly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish, turn the patient's head to the side; and you should place your feet behind his head at a distance of one forearm, and the distance between each foot should be a palm, and make a hole in each foot, firmly planting them on the ground so that they are not injured.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	A fourth foot should be placed in a circle where the two feet meet.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole where the foot is placed, its length being one palm around what is turned (or curved); and in the other feet, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have tied around the patient's feet at the hole where his head should be, and the ligaments that you have tied around his thighs at the circle where his legs should be.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You must place each turn and have a minister who rotates the turn with his hand, and the doctor examines the spine as has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn (or hole):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	When the spine has returned and the hole is closed, it is necessary to place a medicated plaster with hog's lard and stopper over it, and then place a board of the size of three fingers or slightly larger over the spot where the swelling is, and the length should be that which covers the swelling, and on top of the division of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And tie a linen cloth with the ligaments that we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until he is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any obstruction in the spot at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth with the long-term administration of the board, which we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead has been applied to that spot.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes there occurs obstruction in the lower back of the two (spines), and it is caused by dislocation; and that bone that protrudes should not be approached with this medicine because it will cause you to die quickly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscles do not move except for dislocation alone, and it does not happen at those joints as it happens with other small displacements and depressions.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated at the internal divisions, or at the external divisions, or at the front divisions, or at the back divisions.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Moreover, it is most often dislocated at the internal divisions, and rarely at the front or back divisions.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation at the internal divisions is that when you adjust the healthy thigh with the sick one, the healthy thigh is longer and the sick leg is more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend his knee; and the location where the thigh should be joined has been marked with a cauterized apostema, so that the head of the thigh has already reached this point.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the external divisions is that the accidents at that location are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the front divisions is that the thigh spreads out in compliance, but does not bend without pain in the front, and if it is forced to walk and cannot advance towards the front; and the urine is retained and the opening of the bladder is cauterized, and you should have the patient walk on crutches.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The dislocation of the part (hip) in that person can be recognized by the fact that the thigh does not expand, nor can it bend the affected limb as it doubles into the socket, and the socket is shorter than the other, and the hip is softened, and the head of the femur should be directed towards that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of that type of dislocation you consider, if the dislocation is old and chronic, it has already been accustomed to its position, in which case, you do not need to perform a reduction; therefore, it is not a complete cure; and therefore, it is not necessary for progression (of treatment).
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	If the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocations, then you must aim at returning the joint and extend it between the thighs inside and outside, to the left and right, so that it returns easily without needing other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, you must then prepare a strong tool and extend the socket of the thigh lower down, or use a rope that is tied above the hip; and another person extends their hand above in such a way as to place their hands deeper into the hip joint; and hold tight with the rope near the base of the femur, and have another person keep the end of the rope taut.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension is made from the thigh to the hip joint at the anterior part of the neck or from the back part of the thigh to the back part of the chest.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension should be performed in one continuous movement, with the patient raised off the ground and hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns in the manner described, it will be good; otherwise, it is necessary for all types of dislocations to do what I have said about their own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of this type, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside the thighs, the patient should be placed on their back; and the ropes are stopped at the base of the femur in the area between the head of the femur and the lower neck of the hip; and then extend the rope from the front part of the hip to the more anterior part of the chest.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong person takes hold of the arms, and grasps the large part of the diseased thigh and extends it outwards by forceful extension, as it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is easier to cure than other types for which this member can be reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if the patient is too weak to comply with this type of treatment, it is necessary to tie both their feet together with a strong, light rope around their ankles and thighs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be four fingers, and the diseased thigh should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient is suspended over the head of the bed, and it should be elevated as much as possible; and the distance from the ground to the patient should be two forearms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young person to press the head of the femur, and suspend the patient from another young person, and have another young person push on the hip with force, as the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the reduction of this type, when it is dislocated outside the thighs, the patient should walk on crutches as recommended earlier; and the rope is tightened around the hip of the diseased person and their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two beds should be placed, one under the feet and the other under the head; and two more beds adjusted to the middle of the pole fixed over which damp cloths are wrapped around it, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between their legs, so that the extension at the back should not be obstructed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each person extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the patient complies with the reverse position, it will be very good; otherwise, pay attention to it carefully and follow what was said earlier in the guidelines for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It is necessary that the patient walks on their own two legs.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front of the thighs, it is necessary to gently extend the socket and according to the story mentioned earlier on the pole; and the doctor places his right palm over the neck of the hip, and then compresses it with the other hand, and this compression stops the extended hip at the front part of the thigh near the groin.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is behind the thighs, it is not necessary to extend the patient's leg backwards and elevate it above the ground; instead, it must be placed on a hard surface as if the ankle of the foot is dislocated outwards, as described earlier in the treatment for that purpose, and it should lie on its side and the ropes should be extended as described, but there will be no benefit.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It is necessary to administer compression with a table at the joint location.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is difficult as required - and the sign of its difficulty is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two blankets for the patient, and when you see the patient's thighs narrowing and the patient stretches their own leg and expands it without excuse, then you know that the member requires reduction - and then you adjust two cushions and wait with plaster, pulling gently so as not to harm any of the parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the linens and plaster, and compare one blanket with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see the thighs returning to their normal position, then know that the dislocation is closed, and leave the patient to move freely.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any signs of swelling, then return and bandage it, and pull it gently according to the first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that, and make it walk slowly for several days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated at the exterior joints, the internal joints, and more often at the posterior joints; but not at the anterior joint.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is when you ask the patient to apply their arm to their chest, and then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the types of dislocation is to place the patient straight, so that they can extend their arm if possible; hold your hands on the side of it, and press the foot of it between your feet; and bring the shoulder towards your palms, and keep those in position on the shoulder until it returns to its place. And another servant should extend their own leg into the shoulder of the patient until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction is when the arm adheres to the chest without laboring.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then bandage it and make the arm adhere to the chest, and tie them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen the bandages.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not let the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension with linens as described in the treatment of hernia in the previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to injury, and the dislocation of it can occur inwardly or outwardly.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen on the side where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of reduction is gentle, and it should be extended easily and then retracted until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of a dislocation caused by injury, it is necessary to place the patient straight, and have a strong and able servant on the side of the back of that in the right position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Place your right hand on the top of the patient's foot and your left hand on the part below the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Push the foot towards you with your right hand, place your left hand on it twice and stretch it, then push the foot's leg towards the bed with your right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this twice as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Push the foot's leg to the bed on the third count, and you are at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If the foot returns after one or two counts using this method, that is good; if not, continue the procedure, for the foot will return again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reducing it using the method that we have recommended is prohibited, then make the patient lie down on their back on solid ground, stretch out a piece of cloth on the ground and have them lie between it, and you have already wrapped them in cloth to avoid injuring the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Have the minister (assistant) hold their (the patient's) legs, and have another minister extend the foot with their hands or place it on a pillow so that it rests on the neck of the foot; and have each minister extend that part of the body in the opposite direction, while the cloth remains between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being pulled apart at the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor straightens (reduces) the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb at the sides, for the dislocation will return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and the reduction is confirmed to you, then stop applying the plaster and remove it firmly, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	It is necessary to be careful or protect the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the bandage on it is not too tight and does not hurt the area too much.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soaked, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if walking in front of that space is necessary, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be resolved and destroyed, and this would not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If an abscess is discovered, it is necessary to provide care in the manner described earlier (in the procedure), at another location for treatment and dressing, until it has drained completely.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of toes in feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that one who is dislocated be reduced gently with slight extension; and if it is not difficult, it should be done easily.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the second toe (the two smaller toes), then it is necessary to restrain the patient's foot on a level surface, such as the ground or a table, and keep it still as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand by the patient's foot, and place it on something that supports the joints, and press it with your foot firmly until it returns to its original position, and make sure it remains stable and does not appear in the affected area again.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's leg on a table that holds the entire foot, with two ends, and press it firmly with a structure of appropriate strength and stability for three days; then loosen it and let it rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation caused by wound, fracture, or any other conditions simultaneously.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of these occurs, and you engage in the treatment and restoration of it, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, it is not necessary to approach the treatment presumptuously, but one who is skilled in the art, with long experience, mercy, and compassion, should proceed slowly, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and use remedies that stop pus cauterized only when necessary, leave the patient to divine judgment, but help those for whom you hope salvation from destruction and alleviation of illness, and in which there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And thus strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before pus forms a cauterization.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment that stops pus cauterization and heals the wound with what is appropriate for dry dressings.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are separated, you should perform the treatment for their setting, and do what has been said in simple illnesses before these locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be careful and cautious with the instrument in the paths of fear as you have been taught by my preaching; because it is better for you to follow your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to your true body those things at your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis may God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
