Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	In this manner, O sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion it will be understood, and by its expositions, and by its declarations, it is to me apparent that I should commit it to you as a treatise on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the art of surgery is in our region and in our time greatly neglected, thus bringing great peril to the science of it and the instruments of it are lost; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have become obsolete and led to errors and superstition until its intentions and meanings are veiled and its power and art elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It is apparent to me that I shall revive the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it will come with the forms of the cautery instruments and the other tools of the work along with the addition of the explanation, and preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no good craftsman is found with his art in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the members and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; and have understanding of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their numbers, and their growth; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites of their emergence.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason it is said by Hippocrates that a name is nothing, but in the work small and particularly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said of this in the introduction of this book; since whoever is not knowledgeable about anatomy will not be excused if he falls into error, and thus men will die from it, as I have seen many times, because others are misinformed about this science and deny it and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Since I saw a foolish and experienced doctor incise an abscess of the neck on a woman's collarbone, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out before the woman died among her family.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who believed that he could extract a stone from a man who was in pain, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted the stone with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for it to be pulled out, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a blacksmith who was in debt to him due to a fracture in his hip; and the ignorant doctor prepared him by extracting the fracture through the wound with tendons and spikes with strong construction, but did not leave space for breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And loosen according to his wishes, and lay him flat, and allow him to lie still for several days and command that we release him from the bindings; and remain in this state until the thigh and leg are abscessed, and it leads to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, prepared to release the bindings, and achieved tranquility and allowed him to endure his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread throughout the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess of cancer and it became ulcerated near the owner in several days, causing the evil of it to increase greatly.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous cautery is clean of melancholic humor, so it should not be applied to any part, but rather to a member that is hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, sons, the art of surgery must be divided into two categories: one is associated with health, and the other with danger in greater preparations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already experienced this in every place of this book where there is an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it alone, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for God's grace to bring salvation and praiseworthy succession, and leave behind the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and do not abandon your weapons because of that which frightens you; instead, rely on faith in God and in your own name so that examination is not avoided: since remaining with glory, and above all in the world and below your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some places, gualia says:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad illnesses, so that bad physicians are not recognized".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have now divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first chapter of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is dedicated to the treatment of feet, covering the types of instruments and ironwork for cautery, as well as what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is about dryness and perforation, air pockets, sores, and extraction of similar conditions, all cataloged and organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, treatment of twists and similar conditions; this chapter is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauterizing with fire and sharp medicine, and recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary to explain the quality of the remedies for that cauterizing and the harmful effects of it, as well as in what circumstances cauterizing should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I will explain the quality of the remedy for cauterizing and the harmful effects of it in a long and detailed manner, subtle with knowledge, veiled secrets; many wise men have spoken much about it, but they disagree with each other, and it suffices me to discuss one of their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I will explain that cauterizing, in general terms, applies to all materials or its materials, with the exception of two cases, which are cases without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and hard material case, there is disagreement; some say that cauterizing is beneficial in this case, but others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not appropriate for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a dry and hard disease to be treated with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says otherwise argues that cauterizing is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases in the human body, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, the body of a man burns.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I will explain through experience that I have tried in some cases.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary for me to come back to what has been proven and practiced in the chapter on cauterizing due to previous experience, and to know the diversity of human complexion and the placement of diseases within their bodies, as well as the causes of these diseases, and their symptoms, and the space of time for these conditions.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, there is no reason to fear, and even less in wet and moist diseases, because all doctors have already agreed on them, and they are not disputed about the remedy for cauterizing in these conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by cauterizing with fire and the goodness of it is due to cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, but affects only the adjacent members minimally with a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine extends to adjacent members and strong heat brings disease in difficult-to-heal and weak places.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except waste resources, and it is already known through experience and long years of study in the art concerning the truth of causes; because of that, I am excused for the length of my speech. And if it were not forbidden in my book in this place to reveal secret veiled fire knowledge, as well as the quality of the operation in the body and the expulsion of diseases by this method, demonstrated philosophically, which could be useful in your pain.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterizing and they pause the best time in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterizing is appropriate in all times, because the harmful effects of time are submerged in the benefit of cauterizing, and even more so if cauterizing is for pain or necessary pain, strong fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because there is fear of worsening, which is greater than a small harm caused by the passage of time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not to be found in your pains, or my sons, what they estimate is only the vulgar people and foolish doctors, since that disease which is cured by cauterizing is not always beneficial, and they wait for the consequences of it.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they imagine for that reason, because cauterizing is only in a place where medicine alters the complexion and dries out the humidity that is the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterizing is unnecessary in relation to medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease may return at some time in the future depending on the patient's complexion and the location of his disease, as well as the virtue of it, and what is prepared in his body due to the accumulation of superfluous substances in him, and what reaches it through diets and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterizing is administered should be a subtle disease with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it will be small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	A more common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said to be righteous, but I do not think that this is a cure that benefits from medicine or any other reason to use caution.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The reasoning behind saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not that it is administered as a means of treatment in certain diseases, but rather when those treatments do not work, and at the end of the disease, caution is applied and it does benefit.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Then hereafter let it be known that caution is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the reasoning that I understand from the common sayings and tropes of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	The ancients said that the place for cautery does not burn, although this is not absolutely true, because I have already proven and verified that it does not do so in some bodies, and cautery with gold is better than with iron as they said; however, when you use fire with gold cautery, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the amount you want according to the gold's rugor (malleability), and it must be prepared to be cooled; and if you adjust it over the fire and some layers are created in the fire due to the artificer's occupation with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cautery must be made with iron more gently and gradually to correct the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head within the feet, so that you may easily find what you need from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On the caution of pain in the head due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization relieves both coldness and moisture in the underlying cause of which there are two, causing headache, nasal congestion, flow of mucus from the ears and aurelhas (eye ducts), excessive sleeping, tooth pain and goulayro (probably a type of neuralgia), and generally any disease that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, soda (sciatica) and apoplexy, and similar diseases in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the severity of the disease, the age and custom of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And you also command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a tilted bench and place your hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And you place the palm of your hand near the patient's nose, between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, since the patient's nose is not reached directly, you sign that place with a pen, and then heat the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And you place it there on the designated spot, in a manner that it descends, so that your hand may be constrained little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And you lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that a certain amount of bone of the head is exposed, such as the amount of grains of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand with another one, if it is cold, until it is seen the bone that I told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And you take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And you place it on the burned area, over the wound, and leave it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And you heal the spot with a strong four-ingredient medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they already said that when the wound remains open, it burns more, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that the coccyx should be cauterized until it reaches the bone, and the cautery should be kept there until a certain part of the cavity of the bone is scorched.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And you remove what is close to the bone, and heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They also said that with the cautery, it reaches the end, until the bone is strongly threatened, until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati (a disease or condition):
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that from that spot the vapors of the head will expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	However, I do not see these two types of cauterization for everything, only in some men out of fear; and you, from me, it is better for health when it is; because the head is exposed due to the solution of continuity of such things as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a weak nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first specialized cautionery is safer and better for me, and from that house and with that work comes safety. (Or alternatively: The primary type of cautery is the safest and best for me; and from that house and with that procedure comes safety.)
Capitol segon.	Secondly:
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head's cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	If chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and it persists despite using tools such as lances, hooks, capsules, plasters, guaze, cudgels, and bandages, among others, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery without any improvement for that cause, then consider whether the patient's head is of a strong constitution in nature; and if it is not frail and weak, use another cautery to a small extent.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Cauterize that area on the corner of his head with a cautery that separates the skin.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skin and expose the amount that has been cauterized, then cauterize that area again in the lower back of the head at the location known as the "basin" (and this is the location where a blister forms).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And leave your hand in that place, and do not expose the bone because the patient experiences a great deal of pain different from the pain caused by other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Label this cautery in its place, because it is more subtle than the cautery used to cauterize the corners and occiput of the head, and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Seventhly:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On modern migration treatments.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a sudden pain in the head occurs, or pain inside the skull spreads, it should be treated with medications that alleviate pain, and other treatment, which I have mentioned in the guidelines for diseases; and if all this does not help, cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterization with a hot burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Heat up the alum in a pot, excavate it and expose both ends of the pot.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp lance that is deep enough to expose the bone but not visible from outside.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply pressure on the wound using bandages for constant compression, and leave it for three hours; then remove the alum, let the wound heal for two or three days, and apply a dressing soaked in oil until the area becomes dry.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medications which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron can be done as follows: fire for cauterizing, which is described as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a nail-like claw because its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature and the middle part of it is prominent.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the painful area (so as not to harm the archery that is already there) and rotate the small iron slowly but surely.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of tissue that is burned by the incision is too large and causes bleeding, raise your hand to avoid injuring the artery already present, so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And soak the area in saltwater and place it on the location, leaving it for three days; then apply a dressing with oil, and take care of it until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the end of the cutler's hand according to the method of cauterization, and be careful not to make an incision in the artery during this modern technique.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On ancient cauterization of migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an emigranea, as I have said in the previous treatment and its divisions of diseases, and the cure is not helpful, and sometimes because of the disease that does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the cautery knife before it becomes white-hot, indicating the location of pain along a line of length which should be the size of the finger or whatever; and pause your hand for a moment, then strongly press that area and incise the arch and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	You must guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is malfunctioning and should be for chewing, and that the ligament not be swollen and the nerves which control it, and that there is no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution for bleeding from an artery that has been cut open, because in the cutting of it there is fear, especially in those who do not know what to do and are not trained, let the operation be delayed at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to the reminder of the regulation for bleeding an artery accident according to its method, in this book's section on that matter.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if the disease does not respond to this cautery and you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize that part of the head in the proper place as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you come, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the compression of an artery with two cauteries, and this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with cooling agents and other cures as mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, called puntum, which has the following form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the puntum near the burning area and extend it around the entire ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the circumference of each example if the pain is in one location.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Move along the ear with the cautery point by point, as you test the area for the pain spot.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points with the cautery around the entire ear, and that does not help, then cure the spots until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A burn that has been treated and then cauterized is not a burn of the kinds that come from poison, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the type of burn caused by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of burn with herbs and poultices, and your cure is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be the razit of the aurelha, the second a small one at its temple, and the third the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Pause your cautery on the side of the diseased area, because softening is not seen in the diseased area but only in the healthy area.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to cauterize the area with a cautery at the end of the ear above a small amount on the tip of the head, and at the temple another, the length of which should be equal to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the burned area has been covered by the thickness of the skin layer.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is the shape of a knife, the shape of which is flat.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is necessary that this one be very thin, as you will see; and it is necessary to sharpen the knife in excessively rough places a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And cure the area with what is before processing until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what has been said and your medicine does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person with four cauteries: first on all the corners of his head; second at the middle part of the head, as we have said; third in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of using the cautery is as previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has been cauterized over the stomach opening, and it is more urgent; and it should be treated with what is processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by poison.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient herbs and pills that help to cleanse.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And shave the head of the patient completely and pause at the neck with the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Pause that area for a while, as this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do what the previous step has stated.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if it cures well through those means; otherwise, make three cauterizations in the lower part of his head, which are descending from the most superior part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Place a thick bandage on each cauterization, and apply care to the cauterization with water that is boiled.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient is able to tolerate water, make a cauterization in the proper place; if you wish for more intense heat, then cauterize it on both corns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Apply care to it until it is healed; and the cauterizations should be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for relief and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Since you are treating the head with herbs and water as mentioned earlier; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the proper location on the head, and over all the corners of the head, and over the lower part of the neck, and three cauterizations over the spinal processes of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for softening of the body in severe illness and the patient is tolerant, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the spine, and afterwards with cauterization until the pain subsides, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Apply care to it until it is healed, and this should be olive-shaped cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to a fever.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with warm and cold treatments, as well as other care that has been mentioned in the previous division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, administer gargles and mouthwashes that are meant to soothe the stomach, for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the proper location on the head according to the method previously described, and another cauterization on the back of the neck, and one on each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with a heated iron, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then heat the iron as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause the subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted humors that are thick and weak, then cauterize it with the iron as described earlier to cause paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him water that purifies his brain as previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, and apply a well-made and properly made turban over the circle of the skull, and lay it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be seated and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply a poultice; it is suitable for use against ancient scabies of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat it gradually over the fire so that it suffers no harm when placed in the affected area.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply it to the middle of the patient's head in the circle and let it soak until it becomes softened.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Make the patient do this every week once, with other good treatment until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, without having a hand always with such an arranged iron: this is a type of cautery that keeps the brain moist.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply it to the affected area in a remedy or liniment made from quinine.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization of water flowing in the foot.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have recognized the beginning of water in the foot through the signs I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient water that purifies his head, keeping it away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Make him sweat in a bath with alum for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Tell him to wash his head and then cauterize it in the middle of the head with an iron; also cauterize it with two irons over both temples if the moisture is starting to appear in two feet, or one iron if the moisture is appearing in one foot.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all veins and arteries that are closed, with the iron in the length between the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Keep yourself from bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with knowledge regarding the extraction of arteries and the opening of abscesses, as well as taking care to avoid bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes it is cauterized in the cerebellum between two bones with two irons produced in a certain way.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears in the feet are old, and it is verified that they are a surplus of hot humors, then cauterize it with the iron mentioned earlier for the beginning of moisture in the feet, at the middle of the head and two irons over both temples, and two irons between two bones in the cerebellum.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if addition is needed, then cauterize it along the entire length of the calf of the foot at the end of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization of nose smell (foul breath).\]    Quan fetor de nas es causat per las humiditats corruptas e mal olientes, lahoras cauteriza aquel am le cauteri que he ditz en le capitol qu'eu te ho ditz de melencolia.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the patient with what I have told you in the division and it does not improve, then you prepare yourself and give him cochineal to drink for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium-sized iron heated on oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Cauterize it with a clove iron and two irons over both eyebrows, close to the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And take care not to cut through the artery during cauterization.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The shape of the clove iron is as follows:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening of eyelids using a cautery (treatment).
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of an eye is softened due to disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, (the healer), cauterize that one on both eyebrows with a small or double cautery all around the temples and extend past the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand holding the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterizing the eyelid of an eye when the hair turns into parts inside and the eye swells.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of an eye turns into parts inside and swells, cauterize them in two ways: either by burning or with a medicine-burning method.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If by burning cauterization, command the patient to wash their hair as they would when grooming; continue this until the hair grows back and disappears. If it inflames, then you must burn the eyelashes, placing a bandage over them so that no moisture enters until the hair grows out again.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when the hair grows back and disappears, place a bandage on the patient's head near the eyelid of their eye and apply a sign with tweezers according to the shape of a holly leaf, starting from where the eyelashes are growing.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place cotton soaked in alum or egg white on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Place fire under the cautery, which has this shape:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Place the cautery on the shape you marked, little by little, in observed patches, until the surface of the cystic area, which is similar to holly leaves, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing in this work is that you observe the eyelid of an eye becoming contracted and the eyelashes lifted due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore, lift it with your hand for three days and place a cotton dressing over it until the scar rises up.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Cure that one with warm liquid until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	However, if the eyelashes return for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do another cauterization on it as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	However, if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its original position, heals, and the eyelashes do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cautery method using medicine burns is when you command the patient to wash their hair until it grows back and disappears; then make a paper with cloth in the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known sage and live coal and place them on top. (It seems there is a mistake or incomplete line here, as no text appears to follow this symbol.) Or if you do not know what to do, mix those substances together and make it quickly so that it does not cool down; expand it over the paper made in the shape of a holly leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; then place cotton soaked in alum over the affected eye, and keep the patient's head near you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the medicine on the affected area and gently press it, but do not let the patient feel the burning sensation of the medicine; for a sensation like fire is painful.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, when you perceive that the burn sensation has stopped, remove the medicine and apply a cool substance to it; then wash the eye with water; and consider whether the eyelid is raised as it should be after washing with heat or incision, for in this case there will be no more inflammation. If the eyelash returns to its previous state due to the medicine, place the medicine back on the affected area where there was no pressure applied, and do not let it degrade until your procedure is complete and the eye has healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place pressure on the area to be cauterized until the abscess is eradicated, and care for it with gauze or something else until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And be sure to monitor the wound diligently so that no pus from the abscess flows out, and if the eyelid becomes soft after several days due to the skin's cause in the wound, then apply your medicine on that spot which has become softened, and perform this treatment again, and rotate the medicine around until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's wounds differ in size and extent, and therefore treat your treatment accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the path of rectitude from him who is devoted to this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterizing a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When treating a fistula as mentioned in the divisions of diseases and not conferring with another physician, you must then cauterize it according to this method: tell the patient to place their head in your lap and have someone hold the patient's head from yours, so that it is neither harmed nor shaken by the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply a piece of cotton wool or beeswax on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then place the hot cautery with this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, like the shape of a reed or quill, with one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And insert it into the other end (the concave side).
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish, try it out. (implied: perform the procedure)
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the convex side is better for the job.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not already opened, then open it and remove the stone from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the hot cautery over it and hold it with a small distance from the patient's nose to prevent your hand or the patient being disturbed, and then press the cautery on the wound and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery enters the bone at first application, that is good; but if not, repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then press on the area with a linen cloth soaked in drying agent until healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has not healed within ten days, then press on it with sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shaved as necessary in its respective chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method for cauterizing a fistula is to say: press on the location of the fistula and open it and in that opening place a thin rod of the same form as follows: It was the size of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand over it with good grip, and be careful not to harm the patient because the melted lead should not reach the patient's wound; you must press on the patient's wound with an egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the method I have mentioned for cauterizing and healing, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer nose drops and reduce the fistula to the depth of the nose as it comes in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterizing a wound on the head.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequently wounds occur in the lips, especially in children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if your treatment for those wounds is not effective as I have mentioned in the previous sections, then use a small hot cautery knife shaped like this:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The concavity should be the same as that of the knife, i.e., shallow.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place it carefully in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or between the teeth and becomes pus, make an incision and it bursts, and if it is old, break it open, and burn the abscess and make a fistula, and treat it as I have previously mentioned. If treatment is not effective, you must cauterize with the amount received in the fistula, hold the heated iron in the fistula opening, and repeat this process once or twice; then treat it with the ointment I have mentioned until healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess is drained and heals, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the location and burn the rotten bone according to its respective chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterizing teeth and softening gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, but treatment with medicines is ineffective, place the patient's head on your lap, hold the cautery rod in the shape described below (see illustration), place the handle of the cautery rod on the tooth and insert the heated cautery into the gum quickly so that you hold it there until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizing process as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, as the bad tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened, and the moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterizing tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or it is inflamed or worm-ridden, and treatment with medicine is not effective, you can cauterize it using two methods: either cauterizing with a cattle brand or cauterizing with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a pointed tip should be taken, which is made of cow's horn and iron handle, then take care to wrap it in linen and cover the tip of the cautery, immerse it in hot water, and place it on the painful tooth hastily until it becomes numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse linen or cloth in the aforementioned cautery and place it on the painful tooth, then place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the root of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire may be harmful if there is an ulcer or abscess in the area and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then hold the heated cautery in the form you choose, place it on the tooth and keep your hand on it until the cauterization is numb; do this several times as needed for the pain to subside or on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And note that for the aforementioned cauterization, the patient must keep their mouth open with good force and hold the cautery for an hour, then spit it out; this is the method of using the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much affected area as you are able to reach.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the needle (or cannula):
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are of the phlegmatic type and are not obedient to medications for digestion, if you want to promote digestion of that type, then heat the cautery with this shape (as follows): having two handles extended so that smoke comes out from the other end, hold the cautery by the handle and heat it with fire, then place it on the abscess once, and if necessary, repeat until the abscess is cauterized to the root.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then place the cautery on it according to its size, and leave it for three days and place it on top of linen soaked in oil until what the fire has burned away is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with rinsing, dressings, and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cautery should be as follows: (No translation needed for this line since it appears to be describing an image or diagram rather than text.)
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the bronchial tube and especially when it is accompanied by inflammation of the chest, it is necessary to evacuate the patient at first with laxative medicines and then cauterize the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And note that the cautery should not reach the larynx nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a small amount.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebrae of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery should be round like a nail, following the previous method (i.e., as described earlier).
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Care for it with what has been prescribed earlier until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to phlegm, the patient does not have a fever or chills and it is an old disease, then cauterize it with two cauterizations on the furcula in the depressed areas of the collarbone and chest; and with another cautery at the midpoint between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be round like a nail following the previous method (i.e., as described earlier).
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be performed with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose shape is described in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points in these areas; and care for it with what has been prescribed earlier until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery should have three prongs, since cauterization is done with it. Three cauterizations can be made at once in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of twitching which is the head of the adductor muscle.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the adductor muscle is dislocated due to lubricous humors and does not return to its original position when it should, you must reduce the dislocation until it returns to its customary state. Then place the patient on their back or on their side, and elevate the cartilage that is in the inner part of the muscle towards the outer parts with your left hand if the junction is dislocated inwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach the cautery, it has two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Approach the cautery with two prongs, and this is its shape: [The figure of the cauterization will come later, when there are three heads of the cauterization.]
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that subtle one according to the thickness of the skin; this is its shape: [The figure of the cauterization will come later, when there are three heads of the cauterization.]
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some observations are adjusted according to this count and because the cauterizations are eight [in number].
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause over the cautery, cut it with salt, and then make the patient hold still, and let the member not be harmed for any time before it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the part above and below, this should be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or a four-pronged cauterization, because the joint is confirmed, humidity is drained, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital XXVI [Chapter 26]
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humidity and motes occur in the stomach and multiply its roominess, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring [something], it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back, extend their limbs and chest, and then cauterize it with three cauterizations: one cautery placed under the feet for the thickness of a finger, a pointed cautery, and two cauteries placed under the ribs of the cautery until the triangular figure of the cauterization appears; elongate those that are not adjusted to avoid pus formation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized punctually at that point which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sign on the stomach with points according to the amount you wish with the skin, and then cauterize that point with a cautery in the points; and care for it with the treatment preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capital XXVII [Chapter 27]
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of the inflamed liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness, humidity, or windiness to such an extent that it is expelled from its normal position by superfluous egression, and the patient is cured with what has been said without conferring [something], it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back, and sign three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity on the liver under the hypochondriac region, so that the patient's head lies downwards.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be between each cautery according to its thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress the area too much with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of the medicine applied is equal to the quantity of the patient's weight and not overly adjusted; if the patient lies on their feet (or rests) and is not standing, then let them lie down (or rest), who has already spread out his limbs and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery knife, when you have the skill and discretion in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, let the medicine be applied to the entire body so that it reaches the intestines, as the body here is delicate, and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the thigh with cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you are about to excise or drain an abscess in the thigh and want to know if the abscess is located in the muscle of the thigh or in its sheath (fascia), then, if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient feels a heaviness and the pain does not worsen.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the sheath (fascia) of the thigh, then the pain becomes more intense and often exhausts the doctors in its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should lie facing downwards; and approach the abscess site with caution; and heat the cauterization tool, which resembles a rope, as described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize with the hot cautery tool until all the affected area is burned, until it reaches the abscess (sinus), until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the rest of the abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this cauterization method alone, but rather the one studied in the art of medicine, which has been practiced for many illnesses; however, some experienced practitioners may perform this operation differently, but you should follow the prescribed procedure and it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of ulcers (lesions).
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterizations of arthritic ulcers are performed by treating them as plagues, according to this method; and you should take a long, dry arrow (lance) from the arthritic razor collection, and it should be thick like a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse the arrow (lance) in oil and heat it over the fire; then cauterize with a small cautery at the location between the base of the neck and the collar, using two smaller cauteries on either side, one slightly lower than the beard, and two on the area that descends between the fifth rib and the nipple, slightly lower at the back; and another on the middle of the thigh, and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back; and another in the location between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh, after the cautery that is between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is important not to press too hard with the cauterization tool, but rather let the burn mark be visible on the body.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it was said by some ancient men that they used a cauterization iron resembling a rod and heated it, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reached the abscess (sinus) and drained pus, as was discussed in the thigh abscess treatment.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this incision with cauterization, there is no cause for fear, as death may occur in the location of the fistula that has not healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the spleen as I have said about its treatment and not confining it to division, you must perform cauterization in three ways, all of which are permissible, one of which is that you make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cauterizations of the liver, whose figure has been preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness of each cauterization should be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as the one I have mentioned for liver cauterization.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand against the cauterization, and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation and raise the patient's left shoulder so that the left side of the spleen lies flat against it.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And raise the shoulder to the height that raises the spine in proportion to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring the two prongs together and ignite them in the area where they penetrate the spleen of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And withdraw the cautery, so four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And apply the cautery until it has bled for several days, since this is more beneficial than other causes of treatment mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter thirty-one.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in dropsy, but rather incise it specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating dropsy with the methods of treatment I have mentioned and not confining it to division, you must therefore cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one at the right hip, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery remain open for a long time so that it bleeds profusely.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cauterization with anything that requires them to be moved away from it, as this will hasten their recovery with assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be club-shaped, as described earlier, and that used for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier in its shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and other things.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with stagnant water, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the ankle and heel, raise your hand above the cauterization and do not twist it; and lift your hand, but do not completely return it, since stagnant water will run out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped as follows: Make two cauterizations on the two sides of the body, and in each side make a cauterization with the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the body part: one end on top and the other a little lower; and above each body part, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open for a long time to allow some water to run out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat these causes as I have said earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of belly organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When organs of the abdomen are weakened and infiltrated by cold, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated with the methods of treatment I have mentioned earlier, and sometimes the patient must endure cauterization revealing its virtue, in that case cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach as described earlier for stomach cauterization, the circular cautery, and four subtle cauterizations around the navel, a slender cauterizing cautery; and cauterize the liver with a large caution or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if excess moisture occurs and the patient tolerates it, cauterize it on the penis and intestines, and force two cauterizations close together against the stomach and near the inguinal area, since this is a perfect cure without any error in it.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature old hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moistures are not healed by what has been said in the division and do not confer the same healing, then cauterize with three cauteries on the base of the two small ones and a small triangular one, and with a cautery over the navel through two openings.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and his food is spoiled, and his face is ulcerated, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the gall bladder with a pointed cautery, leave the cautery there for some time open, and take care of him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	De cauterizacio de cancro.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Atheyl near the Abscess of the Ear.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove earwax, you heat up the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that heated cautery in the ear canal opened earlier, and apply the heat until the cauter reaches the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the earwax is thick, you cauterize each one separately as previously mentioned, and take care of them with the solutions that give relief to their pain until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some part, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	De cauterizacio de ulceres antiquas e flegmaticas.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the Cauterization of Fistulas that Occur Naturally in the Parts of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work recommended in its place and the patient is afraid of it, heal with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature that has become old, with putrefaction and moisture, and it seems fitting to cure it with cauterization, take care to apply the subtle probe to test its depth and know the quantity of the depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Heat up the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Place that heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the depth that the probe penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the cauterization over that part until the corrupt flesh is burned immediately or a few times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the bladder or intestines, be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you consider that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the matter has been removed from it and remains in that state for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter is not removed, you will know that it penetrates or corrupts the bone in the area or for these reasons that will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	De cauterizacio de ulceres antiquas e flegmaticas en le cors.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the Cauterization of Sneezing.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the nose pain occurs due to inflammation or swelling, and for this reason the patient's throat is painful, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the nose with a cautery over each nostril and with a cautery pointed at the root of which remember the position.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And furthermore, let a small interval be left between them, so that three cauteries will be lined up, and thus they will serve later as reinforcement.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to coldness and moisture, so that the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part, near the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of nuts in a handful; and cauterize it at the lowest part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Let the cautery be pointed as prescribed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the gallbladder.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is coldness and moisture in the gallbladder, and for this reason engagement is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to them, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the area just below the ribs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be pointed.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture softens and infiltrates the ankle joint, causing the area to swell, and when this occurs, a noticeable sign is that the limb is elongated on the other side when compared with it. This could indicate a dislocation of the ankle. The text now discusses a possible treatment for this condition involving cauterization. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found where there is a break.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint of him with a circular cautery, so that you have tested the area in the circle as it is rounded, and thus the joint falls into the middle of the circle. This could indicate that the cauterization is being used to hold the bones in place during reduction of the dislocation, potentially followed by immobilization or further treatment. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	Let the shape of the cautery used for this procedure be as described in the cauterization of the stomach. This could indicate that the shape and method of application of the cautery are important factors in the treatment of ankle dislocations, possibly to reduce swelling or promote healing. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries and an olive-shaped large cautery. This could indicate that the text is discussing a potential alternative or backup method for treating ankle dislocations. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the cautery be made according to the size of the incision in the entire cavity; and take care of it until it heals. This could indicate that the text is discussing further instructions for the treatment and care of ankle dislocations, possibly following reduction and immobilization. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, caused by coldness and moisture, the patient is treated with the water that has been mentioned and not contraindicated, which is an ancient remedy. However, if the patient is full of thick humors, you should leach them with foul-smelling pills or artificial or similar pills; then cauterize it. This could indicate that the text is discussing a potential treatment for pain in the ankle joint caused by swelling or inflammation. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicine-infused cauteries, or cauterizing with fire. This could indicate that the text is discussing alternative techniques for treating thickened humors or promoting healing, depending on the availability and resources at hand. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The first sentence translates to: "As there are two methods known, of which one is to cauterize that part on the thigh with three triangular cauterizations as shown in this form; and do it with good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the spaces between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger or larger."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"Moreover, some observations are that the cauteries should be placed on four spots on the head of the ankle."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize using the circle whose shape is prescribed in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should contain and burn off the entire tendon."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cauterization for ankle pain when it adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the joint."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"However, if it extends into the joint, then you should cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the joint at the location of the pain; and one cauterization on the shinbone four fingers below the hairline."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if it is a cutting cauterization, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the tendon."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the patient has pain that extends to the location near the feet, then cauterize there with a cautery at three or four points, or more as necessary."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the patient has pain in front of the joint, then cauterize there with a cutting cauterization."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And beware in all cauterizations that the cauterization does not burn nerves or large blood vessels, and thus cause harm or contraction to the patient."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen one or more cases of those who cauterized on the shinbone and burnt through in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up until the foot, and it was burned, perforated, and completely rotted."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And appropriate remedy for the stomach is strong solution; and that can lead to death."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is in two locations, then cauterize each location according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"It is said by the wise few in the cauterization of ankle, that the cautery should be shaped like a small circle with its circumference being the size of a palm; and it should be penetrated according to the thickness of a date stone or a finger joint."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And inside that circle should be another third; and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be open at two locations; and the length of the gaps should be one or two knuckles, and make the margins of iron fittingly decorated in the circles; and this is the shape of it:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"Let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks; and place it on the ankle joint, with the patient's leg lying flat."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And thus, cauterize that area using three cauterizations in one observation."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And let it rest for three days; apply an ointment to it using a dressing and leave the wound open for several days; and treat it with warm compresses until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: my sons, of this type of cauterization we have used little because of the fear of its consequences, and few have been found who pay attention to it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"However, of the various cauterizations, those who undergo it will experience pain at that location."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"However, cauterizations with medicines absorbed are those that you should make two circles, one of which has an aperture through which the guffe (medicated paste) is inserted into the iron plate; and the length of the wall in the circle is two knuckles or as many as necessary."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And let the spaces between them be of the size of a finger; and they should be open both above and below, and let them contain each other as shown:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And place your hand on the ankle joint with the patient lying flat, and press on the ankle joint; and take some boiled water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be small but gradually increasing, and hold it there for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and squeezing of it - for the pain is like that of fire - until the pain subsides."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And lift your hand with the instrument and clean the boiled water from all the ankle with sweet water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And let it rest for three days and apply an ointment to it until the burn subsides, and let it rest for some days, and then pus will form on it; this is the best treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And treat it with warm compresses until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends into the joint or hip, make it sit in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Recipe for alkali and for the unquent from both ankles together, grind it and let it rest in a new oil, with one of the locations pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that fits into it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause the other inflamed ulcer and pour warm water over it, which will soften those with a finger, then compress them well for good compression, and let the heated water drain from the ulcerated area into the inflamed ulcer.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour another heated solution over it along with fresh alkaline, as this will produce a strong cleansing effect, which is used in many medical operations and cauterization of other parts, as it performs the function of fire. (Note: Here I'm assuming "aquela" refers to the water.)
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medications are used for cauterization in a wide area, such as pitch and honey mixed with sulfur. (Note: Here I'm assuming "tezizic" refers to pitch or resin, "mel" refers to honey, "anacrat" refers to sulphur.)
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Gaul's operation and treatment for ankle pain and sciatica pain, which is a very effective method and should not require any other treatment, as it heals in one go as recommended, because the patient has already experienced its effectiveness. (Note: Here I'm assuming "Gualia" refers to a person or a procedure named Gaul.)
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It should be treated with a fresh root of certain herbs, if the herb is not found, then fig leaves should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or on the affected area, or on the leg, and tied. (Note: Here I'm assuming "vert" refers to herbs, "atrobat vert" means not found, "camba" refers to the leg.)
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	It should be left for three hours or as long as the patient agrees on the duration of the treatment. (Note: Here I'm assuming "la cantitat de tres horas" means three hours, and "cedacio de la adhustio" refers to the duration of the treatment.)
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse it in hot water and when the patient's body is sweating, apply it to the affected area, as pain will cease and healing will occur. (Note: Here I'm assuming "aquel" refers to the crushed herbs or leaves, "la sol" means the sun.)
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications, rather focus on the body's natural evacuation process. (Note: Here I'm assuming "cauteri" refers to cauterization and "evacuacio del cors" means the body's natural evacuation.)
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Escorides said that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will heal better; and the cauterization should be done in this way: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, then place it between the toes and under the soles. (Note: Here I'm assuming "fenda de cabra" means a sheep's vein, "strengthen" refers to stretching, "antic" refers to ancient or old oil.)
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Take a dry sheep's vein, inflate it with fire until it becomes carbonized, then place it on the wool and let it rest in the area where it is stretched. (Note: Here I'm assuming "fenda de cabra secca" means a dry sheep's vein, "carbo" refers to carbon.)
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Repeat the process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and the pain is relieved. (Note: Here I'm assuming "itera" means repeat, "aquo" refers to the previous procedure or treatment.)
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is known as the "cautery of cows." (Note: Here I'm assuming "manieyra de cauteri" refers to the process described earlier, and "cauteri de vaquas" means the "cauterization of cows.")
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42 (Note: This line is likely just a numbering for the chapter in which this text appears.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Toothache
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Toothache can occur due to multiple causes, such as trauma, injury or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and moist substances. (Note: Here I'm assuming "veguadas" means periods, "cazement" refers to injury, "percucio" means trauma, "superflua evacuacio" means excessive evacuation, "infusio de materia frega e humida" means infusion of cold and moist substances.)
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be performed in any other case except when it is done by the effusion of cold substances. (Note: Here I'm assuming "catz" means does not apply or is not applicable, and "efusio de materia frega" refers to the effusion of cold substances.)
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuation of the patient should be performed using pills filled with similar substances that are placed on the tooth in which the pain is located three lines deep according to its latitude; then the cauterization should be done at each line as needed, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the substance. (Note: Here I'm assuming "pillulas" means pills, "fitidas e am semblant a lor" means filled with similar substances, "latitud de lu" refers to the tooth's depth, "tolleransa del malaute" means patient's tolerance, and "vertut de lu" means the substance's potency.)
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery. (Note: Here I'm assuming "cauterizacio" refers to the act of cauterizing, and "cauteri de punt" means the pointed cautery.)
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, perform cauterization using three or four cauterizations with a medium-sized clamp in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43 (Note: This line is likely just a numbering for the chapter in which this text appears.)
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gangrene
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often occurs in young children; and the sign of its onset in children is that they lose their limb structure, elevation, and mobility. (Note: Here I'm assuming "veguadas" means periods or occurrences, "enfantz" refers to children, "enle ale eves la elevacio e·l movement" means loss of limb structure, elevation, and mobility.)
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it spreads in the lower vertebrae of the spine and those above it that begin to rise over other vertebrae. (Note: Here I'm assuming "derier espondil" refers to the lower vertebra, "dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les otras spondils" means the lower vertebra and those above it that begin to rise over other vertebrae.)
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see it and wish to stop it, then you should cauterize that place with the round cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	take the cautery on all parts of the spine tightly wrapped.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And carefully treat the area from which it is afflicted with what has been said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that cauterization not be administered in a place that was made due to nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	44th Chapter.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with a cure and the pain does not diminish, you should resort to cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	You should cauterize that place close to the evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The olive-shaped cautery is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain moves into the nails or other joints, and this happens frequently, then you should cauterize that place over each nail with three or four cauteries on all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that place without pressing too hard with your hand beforehand; just insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain moves into the nail and the toe, then administer the cautery as was said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the fingers and it is called scabies, then puncture around the nails as follows: puncture along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the nails, then puncture around the nail on each side and at the base of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain moves towards the shoulders or muscles after some days, then cauterize all of them around their joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good care and medicine reception, because if it is done with good care and this cautery is used, he will be cured; God help him.
Capitol .xlv.	45th Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the inguinal region and the intestine protrudes before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen as follows, it is necessary that you tell the patient to stop eating on his own day and use soft foods so that the opening of his abdomen heals.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then place the patient between your hands on his back and command him to keep his legs together until the hernia is expelled or the intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that to the opening and try to close the rupture over the hip bone, pointing out the edge of which is similar to the size of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the cautery that has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red hot and sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over the marked spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and enter that bone of the big toe into the middle of the joint; repeat if you did not manage to enter the bone in the first observation, and do so again on another occasion.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Be mindful of the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn it, causing death or other grave harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you are using the cautery and miss the bone, your operation is in vain.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cautery for children must be fine and proportional to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Take care of the cauterized spot for three days, with bandaging until the scar from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that and the other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should be lying on their back for 40 days, until the wound and sore have healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is important to withhold food from the patient according to the duration of their treatment and the size of their stomach, ensuring that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When forty days have passed, gradually reintroduce food, but maintain this for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Be cautious of excessive labor, food and drink intake, and speak softly to avoid exacerbating the condition. For this regime of treatment will lead to recovery.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	This treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach requires immediate attention. Begin by cauterizing the rupture with a circular cautery according to its size, and it should be dressed as when treating the third part of the stomach. Care for this area as previously mentioned, but do not neglect it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	It has been said by some that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, as it is called "tenta":
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	A line is drawn perpendicular to the longitudinal line above the rupture, and another line across it; then place your hand with a sharp cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46:
De cauterizacio de torcio.	This text appears to discuss the cauterization of ruptures in the stomach and intestines, providing instructions on how to perform this procedure using a triangular cautery. The procedure is referred to as "tenta," which may be a term specific to medieval medical practices. The text also emphasizes the importance of acting promptly when treating ruptures or wounds in these areas, as untreated injuries can lead to severe complications or even death. It is essential to follow proper guidelines and seek medical advice for complex wounds or any signs of infection.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When accidental injury or trauma causes persistent pain in various body parts that does not respond to medication, it is necessary to perform cauterization using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The type and size of the cautery should be appropriate for each body part based on its size, nature, location of the injury, and the severity of the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first cauterization results in healing, it is good; otherwise, repeat the process until the pain subsides. It is common for these types of pains to be alleviated by cauterizing the affected body part near the site of the pain. This indicates that the cautery should be applied directly to the affected area until the patient's condition improves.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47:
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Treatise on Cauterization for Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The use of cauterization in some cases of leprosy is a great help, and it is particularly effective for the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and should be treated as mentioned in the division, or if it has spread throughout the body of the patient and threatens all of his limbs. In this case, cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, the second below, bring the forehead to the end of the hairs; and both above two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, place your hand on the cautery a little into it until it makes a slight impression on the bone and the blisters are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the blister as prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is apparent, it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that have been mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two on each neck vertebra, and six on the lower back, and a large one near the spine, and one on the hip bone, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the wrists, and two on the fingers, and the tendons of its feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the limbs and over each toe of its feet, and over the folds of its arms.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole, as they must not be burned.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	It is cauterized in some cases with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You should know that the more cauterizations are applied, the greater the benefit and the less painful; you should also know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as has been the case with anesthetics, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few, depending on the members and joints, according to the type of iron tools used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Care for the cautery with barley flour mixed with honey and another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Treatise on Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stationary or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, you must then cauterize the stationary member with cauteries according to the size of the member or the smallness of it.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let your cautery make a slight indentation in the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Care for it with honey until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	In some cases, the stupor in the arms and legs, lower back and eyes is cauterized, being careful to avoid damaging the nerves that nourish that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume to know it unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit points of all nerves moving throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Treatise on Cauterization for swellings that are morphic.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, you must then cauterize it over it with a cautery, making a slight indentation according to the size of the swelling until the whiteness and color have subsided and the color has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Care for it with barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and columbine or yarrow blood, each part separately and all mixed together, and lay a linen cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Treatise on Cauterization for crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; however, I do not believe this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is therefore more appropriate to be cauterized in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Treatise on Cauterization for ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an ulcer is delayed in its maturation, due to superfluity or the condition of the patient who is old and weak, lacking blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the ulcer; you must then cauterize it in a circle with several small punctate cauteries, and press that area which will encourage its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform perforation with a cautery, then first ignite the cautery which has this shape [shown]: and dip it in the appropriate place for cauterization until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the cautery is applied to that location [indicated], in order to relieve the body of the arm; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for cancer (or ulcers).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Cancer is corruption spreading through the limbs, which corrupts them just as dry wood burns when consumed by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see cancer in a location that requires cauterization with fire, then first ignite small and large cauterizing iron nails as appropriate in the location where the cancer is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And carefully cauterize it on all sides until you completely eradicate the corruption and no cause of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Let it rest for three days, and apply oil mixed with sulfur over the cauterized areas until all scabs are completely removed and all corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care of it with soft meat-based food.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if three days pass and the flesh heals without corruption, that is good; but if not, apply the cautery again to the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Cancer can be treated with certain medications at times, since it is intermediate in location between cauterization and medication.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire-based cauterization is more easily assisted by other methods.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medication in the division, so take it when you find it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 13
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of nails and similar items.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Observed growths in the feet called nails, which are large, closed, and protrude from the skin; and these are cauterized using two methods: fire-based cauterization and water-boiled cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Fire-based cauterization involves igniting the concave cautery resembling a pen, which is made of iron in proportion to the size of the nail on all sides and has thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the ignited cautery on the nail, and turn your hand with the cautery in a circle around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it rest for three days until new growth begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply a paste made from wild mallow steeped in salt to it, and let the paste remain on it for one night, since this will eliminate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the area with soft meat-based food until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert (change or heal), and observed growths appear on the surface of the body, particularly on the head and feet, you must administer cauterization with water. To do this, take a cup made of horn or iron or a pen-shaped instrument, place it on the nail; then pour a small amount of boiling water into the cup, hold your hand, and rotate the cup around the nail while exerting pressure from all sides and pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the nail. The boiling water will flow along the root of the nail, and wait for one hour for the patient to feel the heat of the boiling water before removing it, since the nail and its roots will be eliminated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	In this way, treat all such growths until they disappear from the body completely.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Take care of any pus that arises where the roots of the nails have been eradicated by using soft food that the flesh can digest easily.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for tremors (shaking or quivering).
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor occurs due to pressure on the nerves or fever caused by pressure, or for another similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauterizations or more on the spondylus bones of the back, between each spondylus bone using one cautery; and cauterize in the feet, stomach, and kidneys using olive oil cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor will subside, and the healing of the underlying illness will be hastened.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidents affecting the body (trauma or injuries).
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is infected with boils that are formed from corrupted thick materials, at first it should be cauterized over the entire opening of the boil with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is stretched out with fire; or with a lancet of erostology; or with a slow cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	In some cases, it is cauterized at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and not always, and it is ruptured, eliminating the excess matter, thus healing from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done with appropriate evacuation using leech therapy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of blood caused by an arrow wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	In some cases of flux due to an arrow wound, the wound should be cleaned from within, or the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the affected limb is performed, and in such a case, it may prove difficult to heal again.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a case occurs, you should take care with your hand at the opening of the arrow wound, place it there and press down on it until the flux of blood stops, and that does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And press down on the olive oil-based cauteries few and large, by many names, and exhale on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from them either a small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein hastily press it because you will have stopped the bleeding, and apply the cautery until the bleeding is blocked and the vessel is constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from those that are heated in the fire, and do not cease to perform this until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in such cases, especially if the artery is large, unless one of four methods are used: either cauterization as previously described, or extraction when it is not extracted, because when its extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or it is tied with thread or twine for strong binding, or it is pressed upon with medicines that have the power to restrict blood, and these must be tightened with a pulvinar or appropriate compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	However, that which provides appropriate restriction with thread and tightening with cloth or by burning causes and similar ones, do not believe in them.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	However, if such a thing occurs and the doctor is not present nor medication, then perform the procedure as previously described on the opening of that vein, and understand the great care required to keep the blood from the upper part of the wound, and on the arrow wound do not allow it to resume; and over the arrow wound sprinkle cold water of great heat until the blood congeals and thickens; but rather consider when there is a need for cauterization or medication.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, perforations, and wounds, on leech therapy, and on sores and their types.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cautery with fire is appropriate and medication burning for certain illnesses, and their occurrences and causes, and the instruments necessary for these and the forms of the cauteries, and we have ordered chapters from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, we will proceed with the method to alleviate such an affliction, so that it may be relieved as requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, it is necessary that you know that in this chapter is what was in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be extremely careful because in the operation that is performed in this chapter, many evacuations are needed which involve blood, with which life itself must be sprinkled or incision on the abscess or opening of an exit wound or cleansing of the wound or extraction of arrows or incision for stones and their types.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all these things, fear and trembling and in most cases death accompanies them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that such a thing should not fall on you in which there is uncertainty, because sometimes you must treat illnesses with methods other than human.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of these are so severe that you should flee with your illness and death is easy for them, due to the severity of their illness, and because of the illness it means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And some of these give you money and a name, you hope for health from them, but their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not agree with one who comes to you of whom this method is spoken; and let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause about it except certain knowledge that has been verified by you, and on which you can rely.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients for prognosis and indication, because in it you are assisted with acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh sons, God inspire your understanding and do not abandon you in direction and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And this chapter is divided into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you seek and for which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease, which frequently occurs in infants, is caused by the infant's birth and when the mother's head of the infant is not covered.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen it afflicted by, it has been a sign of death, and thus it seems to me to be a lost work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and his head was thus magnified until it could not cease increasing in size due to the greatness of his head, and moreover the moisture made it worse until death by fire ensued.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the skull and the bone, or it is added beneath the bones on the forehead.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in this case is when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure along its length, and let the length of the fissure be two knuckles deep until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bones, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head opened up on all sides and water is pressed out when you compress them with your hand from inside the joints and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Pull out all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; bind it up with oil for five days, remove the bandage and treat the wound with ointments and liniments, keep the head raised with a pillow; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and so pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repleting of the water appears, and do as is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And beware that you do not incise the artery and cause it to flow with blood and kill the patient due to the flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries, which are called auricles.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When cataracts or ulcers occur in the eyes or feet, and it is an ancient method that does not confer the cure of medicine, then the last resort for this is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so when you want to incise those arteries that the patient feels his head, first rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and keep the neck of the patient straight with some cloth; consider where the vein pulses; press each location above the locations that are close to the auricles, and these should remain hidden unless in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And beware of the artery with a probe, and incise each one with a sharp spoon, which should enter into the bone, and let this be along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spoon beneath the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	Let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when one vein is incised, blood is emitted with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	However, if the artery does not appear at the incision, it is necessary for you to measure three fingers from the auricle, and beware with a probe, and do so into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which requires the flow of blood is one cupful of wine, And because he does not vomit more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears of the patient's power and the filling of his bowels.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And also pay attention to the wound, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, then cut it to prevent pus from collecting.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And clean the wound with feathers and linen cloth, and then treat it with a poultice until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of hernias that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or new abscess, caused by humid acrimonious substances and qualities in the temples, or a swelling similar to these, and treated with medicines but does not improve, we propose the treatment of extraction of hernias in the temples, or cauterization of such as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of operation and extraction of those hernias is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples; and understand the hernia in the temple which you have seen by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the strength of the swelling.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with rough cloth or warm the area with hot water until the hernia appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And you take the spoon whose shape is:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you prepare the knife with ease until you reach the hernia; and open it on one side and extract it at the superior parts until you extract it from the cavity and expose it from the tunics which are beneath it, all around.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, you envelop it with the tip of the finger, and then make an incision on one side according to the length by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and no blood flow will occur, because if they are not incised, blood cannot be raised from all over.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate the blood from it. for three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the hernia is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong cord or sinew, and do not cut it until it rots before the wound heals and blood flow occurs.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two poultices, and do so at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and remain in that location for that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better if the patient has fever or is in a hot state of complexion, because cauterization helps to dry up moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to perform the extraction of hernias in clean and well-prepared areas, and place them on suitable powder, and treat them with dry medications to cause the flesh to heal and with warm water until it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another examination the hernia causes blood flow, then you should take steps to restrain the blood, or with a cautery, or by applying a clean cloth, and keep your hand over it until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the area until the blood clots, and block the area with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and do it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the easiest method for hernia extraction is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, after you have tried both sides and waited, as necessary, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be extended, because they are not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And here is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The distance between the two handles should be the same.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is narrower than two handles that is better, because if it is sharp like two handles close to each other, the flesh will not be cut with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better than all other operations and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space that is between the two handles should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of colds with acute and sharp urine in males.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the colds are acidic, and they come from veins above the testicle of the head, and no cause for the cure by medicine is found, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes swollen and he feels a tingling in his forehead like ants are walking on it, and the scrotum of such becomes thin, moist until the skin is visible, and the testicles are scalded by the acidity of the tears, ancient physicians used to treat them with this operation, and I name this treatment as "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one should be as long as a small joint of the fingers which are at the lacrimal (eye corner), and the third one from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Here's the translation for this sentence:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What comes from the part between the temples up to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the whole piece of bone that lies between two incisions and chisel the one that is on the bone, then place this piece from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then straighten this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Stop the ends of that sharp part and the flesh attached to it, stop the edges of it reaching the bone, and push that into the middle crack until it reaches the middle fissure, and remove all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure the incision is continuous up to where the bone appears, and place it in the middle crack into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the blood coagulates, press on the places of the wounds with a compress.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And place a cloth soaked in hot oil and vinegar over every fissure, and press on the pus that has formed in them to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day remove the lint and administer a strong infusion of hot water or tea leaves, and care for it with basil oil, rose oil, and others until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of abscesses by cupping and on the heels that descend from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	If an abscess occurs that is continuous and extends, and sometimes the heels of the patient are weakened and slightly extended, and their weakness, ulcerated eyelids and loss of hair, and in the front of the head there is acute pain with associated swelling, then you should know by these signs that the matter and abscess does not come from other vessels but rather from the veins of the brain.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and make a small incision in the middle of the forehead, beginning from the left temple to the right temple; the incision should extend into the bone; and remove your hand from the temples which are painful due to the massage), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Excise all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and place a compress or dry cloth between the two lips of the incision with gauze or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And press on it with pus that has formed in vinegar and oil to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove it and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to cut the bone starting from where the flesh does not heal, and care for it with a drying regimen, which will make the flesh dry, such as if you take two parts of flour and four parts of gum Arabic and mix them together, and make a plaster out of it and apply it to those sores around the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of abscesses in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of an abscess in the ears is one of four types: it is either a mineral stone or something resembling a stone like iron and glass, or it is from plants like cherry or bean, or it is something fluid like water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore when stone or something similar to those causes that are not suitable for the ear is present and the ear is stopped up, and sometimes the stone can be seen, then distill some volatile oil such as oil of violet or camphor in it, and administer the extraction, and cause the nose to sneeze, and open the nostrils so that the nasal discharge occurs.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear and stretch the ear apart at the top, as these things are often forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, administer the extraction with the instrument called the epi-ciliary speculum, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if the epi-ciliary speculum is forgotten, it's okay; and if not, administer the extraction with a very thin hook with minimal duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of metal and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole of the ear and close the end of the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not too tight but only the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Approach carefully extract the intestine with strong attraction, for many have previously observed this.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If not forgotten in this manner, then take alum or vinegar and attach a small amount of it to the bird's leg, and pause it at the end of the ray, and cover that area properly with a bandage.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Approach the area under the nail with ease, and then carefully cut the nail from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so, if all the causes previously observed are not forgotten, then you cut that area to provoke abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that area is that you first lance the patient's saphenous vein and extract the blood according to its nature, then place the cork between your fingers and turn the nail towards the cuticle, making a small crack in the edge of the nail where the germs are located in the most appropriate place.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The crack should be of a lunar shape leading to the stone, and, when the stone is drawn out, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and sew up the crack at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the nail problem is one of the growths that has inflated, then administer the cure and its removal; but if you are not careful, then take thin spittle in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply to that area the abscess of the growth that has arisen in the nail.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that it is already damp from the nail steam, and pause it with many cushions, and carefully remove it from those places with scissors or delicate gestures, or by abscess as previously mentioned, because the removal of it is relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the nail, it is necessary for the patient to perform sneezing at the beginning, and fill their nail with an appropriate old substance, and massage over the nail where the water is located, and if this is forgotten, good; otherwise, take many thin pebbles and lemons according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole in their nail and jump on the other foot from that side and strike another pebble on the pebble that is under the nail.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop this with a pebble until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take paper or cloth, And place one end of it in the nail and extend the other end towards the fire until the pebble is burned at its base.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another cloth and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and strain it with a tube as previously mentioned of the stone remover.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the removal of animal matter that enters the nail, if it is small, do this more carefully and similarly, treat it as previously mentioned in the division; but if it is large and causes swelling at the root of the toe, administer its removal with gestures and scissors, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the nail.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the removal of worms born in the nail, when you treat it as previously mentioned and do not confirm your cure, you must look at the nail on the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so, if any cause of the worms appears, remove it with gestures or delicate scissors, but if no cause appears, take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in this way:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end of the tube into the nail according to the amount that the patient can bear; and cover it with a suction pump strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you are not careful, then plug and seal the circuit of the tube with wax as previously mentioned; administer distillations that have been tried by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and keep this in the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your effusion that you pour the medicinal oils into the nail with this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make a silver or bronze cup, close it, inside which there should be a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And it shall be as they push for the cavity of the catheter to be in the concavity here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the rod and wrap it in the proper part of it, and apply oil in the concavity of the sore, or juice from some herb, or any medicine of your choice into the catheter - it is in the ear - and press the rod with the proper part and squeeze with your hand to compress it temporarily inside until the oil is expelled in the concavity of the sore and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is stuffed into the ear should be heated slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Be careful that the substance you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicines of the ear cannot withstand water.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of ear blockages.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born without perforated ventricles from their mothers, and this condition occurs in some men, blockage in the tissue of the ear due to inflammation or non-healing flesh; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal which does not drain, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which happens at the front of it (the body part), which is not understood by the patient, is in the greatest dispositions for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that which you understand by the patient's explanation, it is necessary that you cover the patient's ear to the ground and look at it (the affected area).
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is an obvious distention, open that with a thin spatula, which is its form.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it (the body part) is small in width, and one side is sharp while the other is not; and the spatula should be of two lion's lengths long to avoid injuring the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to flesh growing in the ear or the meat of it (the body part), you should remove it with a sharp and pointed tool, and cut it off quickly before all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the front of the ear, you should take a thin wire that has been heated slightly with fire and place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient feels obvious obstruction with difficulty breathing, you should try to relieve the obstruction gently without causing harm to the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the ear with cloth of the appropriate size, wrapping it with the Egyptian ointment that you have applied; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound or take some other medication and immerse it in water, then crush it into powder and use it according to the instructions; and if the ear is already suppurating, you must remove the pus and replace it with another medicine that you have wrapped in a cotton soaked in rose oil until the suppuration subsides; and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is bleeding from the ear, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment to stop the bleeding, which is called "distillation" in the medical treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Kapitel VIII. (Kapitel means chapter)
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Vom Behandeln von Augenathese, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken. (Endeveno means to extend towards)
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Augenathese, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken und manchmal feucht sind, sind bei einigen Personen trocken. (Endeveno means to extend towards)
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Deshalb muss man die Augenathese mit der Hand oder mit einem Instrument, das zum Zerteilen geeignet ist, entfernen und auf den verletzten Stellen eine Pulvermischung anwenden.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Wenn es Schmerzen mit Blutfluss gibt, sollten Sie diese mit einer kleinen glühenden Nadel behandeln.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	Die beste Behandlung ist die Entfernung der Schwellungen und trockenen Verletzungen, wenn es noch eine Ursache für die Entstehung ist; und wenn sie mit dem Feuer behandelt werden, verbrennen diese Verletzungen und kehren nicht zurück.
Capitol .ix.	Kapitel IX. (Kapitel means chapter)
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Behandlung von großen Augenkrankheiten, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Beim Auftreten von Tumoren in den Augen gibt es eine Ursache, die ähnlich einer großen Krankheit ist und wegen ihrer Größe und Härte auch als solche bezeichnet wird.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Es handelt sich um eine Ansammlung von großer Feuchtigkeit in der Augenlidunter- und -oberseite.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Deshalb untersucht man, ob die Größe der Tumoren durch etwas hervorgerufen wird, das aus dem Auge kommt und überall verbreitet ist; und die Ursache dieses Vorgangs ist unauffällig.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Es sei denn, fürechte die Tumoren durch eine Aussparung in der Länge und entfernt sie mit Mitteln zur Entfernung oder Abschneiden.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not prepared for the incision, and you cannot pierce the eyelid with a small cut, then you will not notice anything in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then adjust it with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, you will not suffer harm by allowing the anguent (?) to restore and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is spreading towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove the surface of the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook, one that you require for incision, and press it all around, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, you will not notice anything in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Clean the wound with salt water, and treat the area with something that heals it until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of inflammation in the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Inflammation of the eyelid above the wound is grayish in color and is most often found in children, aggravating their wounds and causing their catarrhs to worsen; and they cannot look at the sun due to the tearing of tears at it.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And they often lie on their faces all the time and sleep on their faces; and when their eyelids are wet from below the eyebrows, which have already been covered by inflammation, it appears imminent that infection will occur in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you will feel the infection inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of operation is when the patient lowers their head into your lap, and you place a cloth over them and apply warm water to it in a circle corresponding to the size of the inflammation, and place that over the inflammation and press with your fingers all around to aggravate infection in the middle of the circle. Then make an opening in the middle of the inflammation with a lancet, making sure that the incision is not larger than the incision made during lancing (lymphotomy).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the preparation (of the treatment), it is necessary that you cut open the scrotum entirely until you reach the infection, since in the most favorable cases, the infection may be treated by incision in the form of white pus-like substance.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract it with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers and turn it with your right and left hands until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust the incision so that with the pus you do not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should adjust the incision slightly to facilitate the release of the pus; and then extract it as described earlier; and immerse cloths in warm water and wring them out and place them on the area and press them with sand or something similar.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And let those who have salt and powder it in the hollow of the incision to absorb that remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized spot, you should take care of it with ointments made from castor oil until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods for touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When ulcers on the eyelids are caused by natural hairs and are chronic, you should press the eye with your fingers and make efforts to find ways to alleviate the pain, such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelid, which is known as touching the wound. Treatment can be done in four ways: either by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine as described in the section on cauterization; or by touching through incision and suturing; or by using tubes as I will explain later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you should lay the patient's head in your lap; turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where the hairs are closest to the underside of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the eyelid, and it should be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are located; pull the needle out towards the upper part of the eyelid with your right hand, and turn the eyelid away from the eye.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an opening in the underside of the eyelid near the hairs that are closest to the upper part of the eyelid, and insert a lancet into the lacrimal duct from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one; and extract the needle and place small pieces of sand or cloth under the eyelid, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with tweezers in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important that the shape should correspond to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, since this has been diversified among men, for those who require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is next to the natural hairs as the thickness of a coin.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here is the translation: And place the coin in one of the two angles of the incision, and excise that entire area, and adjust the two labias (lips) with a fine thread or woolen yarn, cleanse the blood, and adhere any superfluous hairs over the eyebrows with certain adhesive substances if you want to do this, but do not bother if you don't.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Here is the translation: And let the suture of the hairs remain for three to four days and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	Here is the translation: And if you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid recovers quickly from the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients used this method more often.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Here is the translation: However, it should only be sought when the patient requires it, and it is a good action, and there is no reason to fear it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation: And another method of treatment is to draw the figure of myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and connected incisions as follows:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the translation: But if this method cannot be performed, then hold the incisions, and ensure that it is not sutured. Then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle next to the greater lacrimal, and the third needle next to the lesser lacrimal, adjusting them equally between the incisions. Lift your hand with the same elevation as the incision on the area marked as described earlier.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation: And adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Here is the translation: But if an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure, remove it with a lancet and similar instruments, and wash it with warm water.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here is the translation: Sometimes hairs grow into the eyelid, and then you should use what has been described for incision; but suturing is more artificial in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The method of cauterization with reed is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	Here is the translation: And you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as described before; and carefully make two thin reeds or twigs, whose length should be equal to the length of the eyelid, and the width of their ends should be slightly smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	Here is the translation: And you have already made an incision at the ends of each partition where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Here is the translation: Apply each part with fine substances under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the reeds of each partition with strong compression, and leave it for several days, since the wound will dry up and die and eventually fall out.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation: But if it takes too long, break the thread and care for the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When the eyelid has been treated, it rises and the hairs do not pierce through.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the way to make two reeds as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Title XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On removing hairs that pierce the eye with an awl when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and piercing the eyes, you should perform the operation by taking a sharp awl, placing it on a soft and supple needle, and ensuring that the ends of the tool are adjusted carefully without any subtle movement.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the hairs should be as long as one hand span.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	You should make another thin needle near it in short order, and cut the ends of that one if you want to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place the patient's head in your lap and position it facing you so that your work is visible, since this operation is delicate and requires precision.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Approach the needle into the incision of the skin carefully adjusted that requires suturing, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before drawing it out through the skin naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair up and insert the thread into it (or them), and ensure that there are one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then tie your hand around it where the hair has been pulled out, inserting the thread into the eyelid and pulling it through naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the stitching is not done and the hair has not been pulled out, you should insert the thread at the sides of the wound that you have made and tied with the same thread, until it emerges through the skin above the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wait for the wound to heal, because when you have inserted and tied the stitching, you should press on the swelling and clamp it with forceps, leaving them in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its location and grows over it well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too short, then you should take a longer natural hair and tie it to the one that has been pulled out, lifting it up or letting it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and continue lifting it upwards.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of echydris that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an echydris (sty) appears in the eyelid and is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled to one side due to poor healing from a wound or burn, it is called leprosy, and this type of echydris can be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing from a wound or burn, or resembling them in appearance.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of operation is to make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	It is necessary to treat the cause of the echydris that causes it to recur, since if you do not do so, the echydris will return even worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use remedies that soften the cause, such as fenugreek, and wrap it in water in which it has been boiled with its seeds, or gum tragacanth, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and treat with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret to your treatment is to perform all procedures without causing any further consolidation according to the original form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not only a correction of echydris but also serves to restore the original shape of the affected area.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of echydris that occurs in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	The echydris that occurs in the lower eyelid is called true echydris; it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental echydris is caused by a wound, burn, or other similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operation for this is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the skin, making it pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin to the sides with the needle and sew it up with the needle, making an incision with a large scalpel.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the eye shape returns as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the split figure, then turn the eyelid and make two openings on the sides of the eyelid from its hinge.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The extremities of the two fissures should be made at two angles of the incision, which you have already made up to where they converge, and the angle should be made such that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the flesh to the extent of the acute angle's width, ensuring that it is sufficient for the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with cotton thread, and take care of them with the medicine for softening and blisters until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you are incising through a fissure or suture or cauterization, then you must open it with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the blister between the two lips as previously mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of incision, whether above or below, it runs in operation according to its preparation, and that shape is in the form of various motes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsman always prepares an instrument in every way that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural shape or as close as possible, and the patient according to what is necessary for the operation and tools in the best arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid adhered to the cornea or conjunctiva, and it is solidified above the lid and the albumen of the white, prohibiting the ease of movement and its natural functions, therefore you must go under the edge of the ray from below the eyelid and lift it upwards, or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you must incise the adhesion with a thin spatula that is not as sharp as an incision, having a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the white with its point.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then put salt water on the white, with which you wash it; or distill in its place a solution of rosewater diluted in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid and conjunctiva with blistering fluid, and place cotton wool soaked in albumen of egg white on the conjunctiva, and apply the third day causes for consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	When it comes to the incision of a nail and the removal of skin from the tear ducts, follow these steps:
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail can be in two ways: either it is nerve-like and similar to hard, thin cartilage; or it is not-nerve like, similar to white, congealed moisture. When you touch it with an iron, if it is filled, it will break off and the iron will not be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both cases, they do not start except from the larger tear duct and gradually cover the sight and block the light and movement of the white.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of working in the incision is that the patient holds his head in your lap, opens his eyes wide, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, then collects the nail with an iron probe and extends it to the sides above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Approach a needle and insert it into the big toe of a horse or bull or cow, or similar, or strong hide, double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle through the nail, and tie the skin to the nail; and then stretch it to the sides, remove the hide piece from the nail root which contains the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Following this, you continue with the skin into the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you also incise the remaining skin at the root of the nose with a sharp blade or small scissors, and cut through the natural cartilage of the nose so that the incision does not cause continuous tears of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	At times the nail with the sole extended or thickened, as has been said, and then it should be excised with a lion's tooth, which is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the scalpel and to cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the incision at the heel with a little salt solution or vinegar made of cinnamon, let it enter for a day, and care for it with whatever is needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle, or if it is embedded in the onyx, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and healed in such a way as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise it, then you open the heel of the patient and take a sharp blade in the form of a lion's tooth with full sharpness:
am subtilitat.	with sharpness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is narrowed and congested and you insert in that incision, then distill your oil made of cinnamon or cinnamon oil or salted water into the heel for a day and apply it to the heel daily.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation over it until everything that is of it has passed, unless the opposite abscess begins in the heel, then you remove that, and treat the abscess at first until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the nasal tissue, if it is noticeable in the heel with great harm, should be suspended by the nail; and incise that from one side, and do not deepen the incision so as not to cause continuous tears of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply cinnamon oil to the nasal cavity daily until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of gangrene and that which is born from tight skin on the heel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the heels of elbows, red skin is born, and it is overpressed before covering the pupil, or near or protruding on the eyelids and strongly compress the eyelids at the sides outside and resembles a rose bush.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation is that the patient places his head on your lap; and you open the heels of it and collect all that skin with the appropriate nails, using a forceps or a bandage; and then incise the skin from the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to cut the heel as you perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be with the one you incise that or with the scalpel that we have recommended in the nail incision, or with small scissors with which you can cut according to the shape of it as this chapter will explain further.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that skin has been removed, fill the heel with salt water, or distill in it red powder like the corrosive medicines, and wait on the heel covered with hog's fat until the abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is still any cause of gangrene and the wound is infected with pus, and you fear an abscess, then remove the heel and treat that abscess with what cures it, and repeat over it with the operation until it is healed, and do the same with the tight skin that appears on the heels of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must make sure to remove all cure of the heel naturally or accidentally by iron and not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the heels.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is red and swollen on the heel and prevents the clothing from operating, and you uncover the heel for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you examine whether the person has a strong pulse and if there is no other disease present, then you collect that pulse (or information).
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and support those veins with an inch or two, depending on your discretion; that inch should be made of a double fold according to this formula:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually folded together in one place according to this formula:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins should be collected with delicate force, and the blood withdrawn gently, until you see those veins become engorged with blood and swell.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to injure the pulse at the extremity of the wound; and if your operation is to take place during the day, and you are firm in your action that you do not accidentally puncture anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed (the procedure), then you distill in the pulse head, whether white or red, with such acidity that it will dissolve what has been engorged from the pulse.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you (to complete the procedure in one go), then collect everything at that time, and plug it all with what alleviates the pain from there, and let it lie for several days until the pain has subsided and the wound is assured to be cauterized.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat (the procedure) as needed, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method of the leeches:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of an arrowhead into the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat an arrowhead with cauterization or acute medicine as described in the preceding narrative and it is not healed, then do not probe in that area but rather make a small incision over the abscess when it has matured, extract all the moisture present within it, and reveal the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument that has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp point and should be made of iron. The head should be round, similar to the shape of a needle that has been pierced through with a burr or file for fine pointing, such as shown below:
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupt area of the bone and gently rotate it between your fingers while pressing lightly until you feel that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Allow some time for healing and restore the area with drying and stopping agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown over it, and the wound is separated from the surrounding tissue for forty days without renewal or abscess formation, and there is no accident at that place, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, do not probe further but reduce the wound to the shape of the nose, following this method: Take three pieces of bone or medicine sharpener and make a small hole in the bone as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The instrument should have a triangular blade and the handle should be extended to the tip as much as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place that over the bone (the lacrimal bone in this case), and hold it with a little pressure on the wound. Then rotate your hand around the instrument until it penetrates completely through the bone, feeling the patient's resistance as you do so.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with drying and stopping agents such as those you have been instructed to use.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and area have hardened, the material that flows out from the wound returns to the nose, so be careful not to burden the patient with it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Reduction of the hernia swelling
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia swells completely and there is no harmful consequence or reduction, then you must first make the patient lie down, place them on their back with pillows under their head, and place cold compresses on the neck without cutting it; and then apply a liniment over the hernia that has been made from castor oil, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and firmly press the plaster onto the hernia with lots of powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of powders is to take cloth made from lion's wool, and each piece should be folded into four layers; make powder from those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then apply the powder one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the hernia.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then press hard with a thick, strong cloth and tight binding, and repeat the compresses without cutting; remove the dressings, loosen the hernia and allow it to rest during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made tighter.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And remove the dressing during the day and night as I said earlier.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, then that is good; otherwise, apply the plaster with powders and tight binding and compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the protruding uveal tunica (eye sac).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes out of the eyelid like a grain of sand, and you want to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and place another double threaded needle in the tear duct; make that one penetrate and leave the first needle as it is placed; then incise the location of the double needle and lift the uvea edge around the needle, and press that area firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and wait until the woolen thread soaked in egg white dissolves, until the thread comes out with the grape (the protruding part of the eye).
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the wound with something that supports what's inside so that the injury heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	At intervals, gather together all around the wound a circle of fabric around it, adjusting it so that it covers the entire wound area, and then pierce it with a thin needle near the edge of the wound, let humidity run through the linen, and draw down the wound and enter immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then apply strength until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ulcer which is called an ulcer is not simply watery discharge from the wound, but it is something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working on it is to make the patient sit over a prepared and straight seat, and then take hold of his head with both hands and push him down so that you can see the discharge coming out from the wound, and let it dry and do not let it descend, and keep the light on, and let the patient see the cause in this way as he used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down (the discharge), then you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if the discharge is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and press it on the conjunctiva at the junction of the cornea in the cornea (at the appropriate location), until the discharge is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when the discharge is removed, you distill water from the wound in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let it be treated with other causes until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of the water flowing from the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which should be pierced with the medicine declaring it, then that one according to its health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold his wound tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand close to the eyelid of his right eye if the wound in which there is water is on the right side; or with your right hand, if the wound is on the left side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take almadra with your right hand if it is on the left side; or with your left hand if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then grasp the end of almadra close to the crown because of the thickness of the bone in the area of the little tear duct and move it with the force and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then press the eyelid and feel that almadra has been brought out due to your action.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And mark the measurement of the channel of almadra to the point where it ends, and this is from the pupil to the end of the black part, and this is the corona of the eye; for you will see that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then grasp almadra within the place where there is water and throw it down once or twice, and if the water comes out quickly, then the patient will see over what they are looking immediately, and almadra in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And let it rest for a little while; so if the water has come out, then you pause another moment before letting go of almadra.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and the water does not come out, then you extract almadra gently and rotate your hand around it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt gemma in the water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then stop the eye with cotton or a pad soaked in rose oil and warm water and ligament with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those of us from our time bind the swollen area with warm water.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you cannot insert almadra into the eye due to its hardness -- for some men have a hard eye --, then it is necessary that you take the spatula called alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that conjunctiva with it (alberid), and do not damage your nail in the process, and do not go too deep to the location of almadra.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert almadra as previously described.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete your work, prepare the patient a comfortable bed made in a dark room where they sleep on their back, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Let the patient rest in nature for their condition to stabilize and do not move their head to the left or right side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Keep the ligament as it was placed for the next three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release that in the dark room and open the eyelid, show the patient some causes, and return the ligament on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the hours of healing or immediately before the injection.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you avoid doing this because water can easily leak due to its great and violent movement.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you must release the eye within seven days and treat it with what causes the abscess to subside.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then clean the eye and rest the patient's face on a warm surface for some days so that the swelling subsides in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And give them mild food and talk to them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in all cases the disciple is not excused from vision for several days, and therefore you must be courageous about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have learned from one of those who is called Arteghe, and another said that they made fire in the Ayrac chamber with a hot iron to pierce it and expel water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But in our land, we have not seen anyone who has performed this, nor is it written in any of the old books; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the species of madness for those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They can be made of earth or iron specifically and they have protrusions with this subtle triangular shape, the tip being sharp like that shown in the figure.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of skin growths in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born diverse skins associated with some cause that resembles the scorpion movement of legs, or polyps feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	It is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and it is not a lion's flesh that is dark in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient lie down with their face exposed to the sun and open their nostrils, and pick your finger in those skins.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And remove that part outside the nostril, and make an incision with a sharp spatula on the side where you know that all the skin has been removed; if it remains due to some cause for which abscess is possible, then you must cut it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until it no longer remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lady has pus or an abscessed boil, then you pause it; if it is a malicious boil, then you cut and cauterize that inside, which should be separated from the pus, and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a mustard plaster near the incision with wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and you introduce moisture inside the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is no flesh or bone under the pus sores in the nose which has not been purified by abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, insert a thin needle into it, if there is any swelling, and moisten the needle, and pause between each prick the quantity of the finger or thumb, and lead the patient to rinse their nose with water, and insert the tip of the needle in the nose with the ray or another suitable method.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, draw the patient's smell towards it and lead it to the nasal canals, and let it emerge from their forehead, because prolonged observation seems similar to this action to children in school, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two extremities of the needle, one end that extends towards the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a suture to the flesh with the needles that are in the needle, and do this until you know that the flesh is among the needle holes.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the needle, pause in the nose near the drainage of pus with a cloth, and do this for three days or more until the wound is healed from the surrounding flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the cure dries out, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for the nose purger with which essential oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or iron, similar to a small uncovered lantern, like a small cone, and the handle similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the cannula of the nose purger instrument should be flat and open; to which you will hold when you are sucking oil or any juice or substances that you want out.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This nose purger is valuable: the recipe of beaver's castoreum, white balm, ginger, and the seeds of fennel, long pepper, asafetida, and epithemyrium anethole. Mix with the juice of beets and cabbage, and make pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and give it to the patient sitting facing them.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On teeth that emerge from the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Prolonged observation shows that teeth are born from the nose, and it is magnified and emphasized in some days before the rule of law takes effect.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Therefore, you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance and cut out everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the area or burn it with cautionery or medicine that is in place there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hard, dark colored, and has little sensation; do not touch it with iron, as it is a cancerous abscess; for prolonged observation shows that he who cuts into this abscess does great harm to him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is soft and not dark colored, and incision is possible everywhere, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and cure the area with anything that dries it and keep it closed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The dissolution of continuity (suture) in the nose, lips, and auricle due to ulceration or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, it does not confer treatment except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is for some reason that you encounter one of these conditions, consider whether it is fresh ulcer with its own blood flow, and then adjust the two lips of the ulcer with suture, and take care of the wound to be healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated and each is made healthy, then you must carefully cut each part of its border until it bleeds.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with suture and tighten them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood over them and let it dry for three days, then remove the plaster and replace it with another consolidating plaster, and leave it until the pus is expelled, and care for it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	However, the method of suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as it has been recommended in abdominal surgery, or that you fill the dissolution of continuity with pus as I have told you before.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capítulo 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Extracción de causas que surgen en ambas labias en las divisiones internas.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Mujeres observadas que presentan absces duraderos en las divisiones internas de sus labias similares a grasa mal alimentada y algunas más pequeñas y otras más grandes.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must cauterize and close the labias and fissures of each one of those hardnesses on all sides, and fill the abscess with powdered sage until the blood is restricted, then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with astringent water until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capítulo 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Incisión de la piel adjunta a las encías.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Trabajo observado sobre la piel ajustada a una encía en el que los viejos llamaban albulus; entonces debes suspenderla con cordones o apretarla con clavijas y cortar su base antes de que se inflame, y permitir que corra le sangre.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Y asegura el lugar con polvo de algodón, polvo estípico o polvo cauterizante.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Si el tejido vuelve a aparecer, entonces debes cortarlo una segunda vez y cauterizarlo porque si cauteriza no volverá a regresar.
Capitol .xxix.	Capítulo 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Extracción de dientes con clavijas.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	Cuando en la superficie de los dientes en las divisiones internas y externas, entre las encías se encuentran cáscaras duraderas, a menudo amarillas o verdes, que causan corrupción en la encía, entonces los dientes afectados por esta condición son removidos.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore it is necessary that you seize the patient between your hands and hold their head in your lap, pull out the teeth from which the sores and causes similar to sand appear before any cause remains, and do this with the blackness and citrinitat (possibly a misspelling of "citrinitas", meaning something related to citrus or yellowish) and other things until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the reason for this treatment has already begun at the start of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you should reiterate the reasoning on another day and on the second and third day until it reaches its final stage in whatever you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth require various types of resorbers (possibly a term for substances used to dissolve or remove) in different shapes depending on how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore since the resorber for a tooth from within the gums is different from the resorber used between the teeth according to other shapes, you must prepare these types of resorbers that you will see shortly.
Capitol .xxx.	This line appears to be a capital letter (the Roman numeral "XXX" or "30") rather than a separate sentence, possibly indicating the beginning of a new section in the treatise. It is common for medical texts from the Middle Ages and Renaissance to have titles or sections numbered in this manner. The translation provided does not attempt to interpret this line as text since it appears to be simply a number.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with every means and take great care in the entire eradication of it, because there is no need for further observation when it is eradicated, because it is a superfluous substance during the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, when the patient is ready to have that tooth removed, you must certainly be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe that a healthy tooth is causing it, and you remove that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have seen in barber surgeries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know this well, you should then make an incision around the tooth with spittle containing some virtue, until it has dissolved the tooth from the gums on all sides, and then apply a hot iron (perhaps a branding iron) or thin forceps gently to loosen it bit by bit until it is extracted.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then apply alcohol (possibly a strong spirit) with forceps to hold it firmly and place the patient's head between your hands so that you can hold it securely, and extract the tooth carefully in a straight motion without breaking it or causing further pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if this is not forgotten, you should then take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth with ease and exert force to remove it in the same way as was described at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is fractured or decayed, you must then wrap it in cloth and tighten it with a thin wire at the root to prevent it from being broken during your constriction on it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must work carefully around the incision in the gums and be aware of your strength so as not to break it and leave a piece behind, and return to the patient for any pain that is greater than the initial pain from the procedure.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their reckless and hasty dental extractions, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times this results in large infections that are difficult to treat, and all the roots remain, or some of them remain, or you extract it with some bones from the jaw as has been testified by many.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the removal of it (the affected area), wash the mouth with vinegar or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there are flows of blood from this place, proceed as with a wound cauterized, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the affected area, if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers with which you begin to extract the tooth should be long, short and thick so that they are not bent when you have to use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And as with large hands that go deep within but are not bent, they should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian steel and properly made straight shafts, and in the shafts there should be teeth that interlock with each other and tighten by forcefully constricting, and sometimes the shafts should have the shape of an heron's beak (ciconia), which is called a claw, and they should be strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Removal of Teeth and Extraction of Fractured Jaw Bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of a tooth that is fractured for some reason is necessary, you should first stop bleeding at the site and wait one or two days for it to become soft; then apply the heron's beak-shaped tweezers or pliers (ciconia or guanta) with the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The shafts of these tweezers or pliers should be made inside like a file or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey the above-mentioned forceps or pliers, you should carefully observe the root and cut all the flesh and insert an instrument called ataly (a small lever with this shape):
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should be short in length but thick, and not sharp so that it is not fractured.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the root is forgotten in this way, it is good; otherwise, use other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be a triangle and very thin at its tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And this instrument, having two ramps, its shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; for this reason it is also used with the instrument similar to an ox-goad (uncia grande), whose shape is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness and not be sharp so that it is not fractured.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools for the removal of dead teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Wise and skilled artificers will recognize this by themselves according to what it signifies for them in terms of the operation and various diseases; since there were diseases that the ancients did not know or care about, but had different shapes in different species (of instruments).
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured or dislocated, you should apply warm compresses to it with the appropriate instruments and forceps mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help it using an instrument whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	It should be of any thickness, gradually becoming smaller, and tightly held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or running out before the entire bone is removed; and finally, restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small cavity in the bone, you should remove that cavity and its blackness and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of protruding teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude unnaturally from their shape, it is considered a law, especially when it concerns women and the very venerable, so consider this: if a tooth is not adjacent to another and cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then pull that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is like that of a pig's tusk, and made from Indian agate steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Then make your incision with the instrument to cut off that tooth in several days due to its hardness, and ensure it does not affect any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth is protruding unnaturally due to grinding, then grind it off with an Indian steel file whose shape is:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let it be entirely of Indian steel and the grinding wheel should be smooth; it should be of small pointed points like a file with which needles are made. Grind the tooth bit by bit in several days with ease to ensure that it does not affect any other teeth or cause damage.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then straighten the remaining part of the tooth and root it out with tweezers.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If part of the tooth is cracked and touches the tongue, then you must grind the tooth until the sharp edge of that fracture is smoothened, filled and covered to prevent the tongue from being injured or words from being distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged due to trauma and removal by percussion or hunting, and the patient is unable to chew food, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for prevention of decay in those that are firmly attached with gold filling, not silver, because silver turns green and can corrode in a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The filling should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place double its amount between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow between two damaged teeth or one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Ensure the sealing extends to the damaged area and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is healed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your pressure should be firm enough to hold the filling in place without causing discomfort or injury to the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Cut off any excess filling with forceps or scissors, place it in various locations, and fold it back and hide it between the healthy and damaged tooth to avoid injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Wrap that area tightly like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy and two damaged teeth, sometimes interlaced in this manner:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth are extracted and return to their respective sockets and grow back as recommended, they should remain healthy and strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled and wise craftsmen should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes the bones of a cow are suitable for certain dental issues and can be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, strengthened as mentioned before, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Incision of the ligament that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which appears sometimes on the tongue, either naturally or it is a common one that humans have, or an accidental one that occurs due to injury which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is to open the mouth of the patient, holding his head; raise his tongue and approach to incise that ligament nerve according to its thickness to the extent that the tongue is freed from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or thickening, and it is caused by injury consolidation, then you pour oil and divide that ligament according to its thickness to the extent that the ligament is incised and the hardening is removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Make sure that not a wound is made in the bone, and that you divide only the arch and let blood flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the remnants of incision with water or vinegar, or water rinse; and place a clean linen over the tongue to keep it moistened in every night to prevent consolidation again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, place over the area a piece of linen soaked in vinegar; but if bleeding stops, cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for that purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of it using other treatments until healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extraction of the salivary gland from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes under the tongue an aposteme similar to a small tumor arises, preventing its normal operation; and often it becomes inflamed until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation is to open the patient's mouth with a spatula and examine the tumor.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is dark or black, hard and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, do not touch it as it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it appears white with humidity, then you pour oil on it and incise it gently with a thin spatula, incising it all around; and if bleeding occurs during your operation, place over it this linen soaked in vinegar to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it thoroughly, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; take care of it using other treatments until healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of the two-eared tumor and tumors that are located in the groin area, and other tumors.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a swelling appears in the groin, it is glands that resemble pus, which occur outside and are called two-eared tumors; if you treat them as described in the division and they are not healed, then consider if the tumor is hard, dark, with little sensation, do not touch it with an iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is reddish in color and the root is thick, do not touch it with an iron because of bleeding; leave it to mature, and then either cut it out or let it burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white, round and the root of it is fine, it should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation is to first determine whether the tumor has rested for a while with caution or if it has diminished with some reduction; then you place the patient before the sun, holding his head and opening his mouth with a spatula, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below using a noble instrument with this shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron, and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus, as you press the tongue and the tumor is revealed, catch it with your instrument and put oil in its opening, then pull it out to the sides as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another cause of the tumor is the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument with this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but its extremities are curved, so that the opening of each one is opposite, very sharp, made of iron and tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available, incise it with a spatula with this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one tumor, incise the other following this method of incision, and then cover the incision with water rinse.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, apply decoccted coriander or myrtle leaf water or similar to stop the bleeding, and take care of it until healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the groin area other tumors appear besides these two-eared tumors, and incise them as described in the incision of two tumors together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with a tumor that was located in her groin area, which appeared dark, with little sensation; she had already closed the groin area, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had already stopped eating and drinking water, and was approaching death if she had stayed another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had grown so much that it had four openings through which it drained.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	You should make an incision in one of the openings and pull out that part, and then take hold of a large piece from it, and then pierce the other opening, and press the hole closed, compress its tongue, and place an opening in the abscess at the point where you took hold of the other opening, and press it closed.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then take out a large portion of it, and let only a little blood run from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, close the wound of that woman, and let her start drinking water immediately, and provide food, so you don't continue to incise the abscess many times for a long time, and a new abscess forms in its place, which you should incise before it becomes prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then seal and cauterize the wound, so that it does not get infected; and walk around without knowing what God has in mind for that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of the hernia when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia is catarrhal and abscessed and long, it is called a perpendicular hernia; and if it is in the large, rounded portion, it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is healed as we have said in the division, and it does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes an abscess that has already cauterized remains subcutaneous, then you must incise the rounded one; and if it is along its length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not centered, then you must be careful in incising it, because there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method that I have said regarding its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument used to shape it, and place the opening in the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of the abscess.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it unless it is attached to the natural boundary without addition, because if you incise more of it, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we recommended in the incision of the abscess, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cautery is nothing more than with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water that we have said, and apply it to the live tissue, and let it not be thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a mortar with a handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the urethra, and the patient coughs on his own side so that saliva or nasal discharge from the mouth of that person flows into the internal medicine through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any damage to the wound of that area.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for as long as an hour until you see it become blackened and numb due to the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray into a cannula beyond where the cotton adheres to the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary to achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to reapply the medicine, reapply it, and cauterize the area around the uvula with cotton dipped in turpentine, clean it with what is in the circuit of the medicine, wash it with warm water, cure it outside with ointment, and guard it with guargarismes until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and prolonged fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calmly, hyssop, origan, rue, scicadus arabicus, camomile, crushed, and similar herbs, and mix all those causes or some of them in an oil, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; the oil should be well strained and in the middle of the oil there should be a hole, over which is placed an instrument with a concave handle according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth up to where the steam can reach the uvula over the canal, until the uvula is well obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Approach the spot observed to be swollen until it becomes dry, and ensure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of an abscess's appearance, as it would overtreat the abscess, and it is not necessary that you do this, but instead, you should make the abscess's declaration from the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you are not present with this instrument, then take a cane and make a hole in its end to form a hollow, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed, as the cane's hole prevents the steam from burning the patient's mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and things that stick in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Swollen spots stick to the throat or a thorn or something else.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears from those, observing on it, as you press the tongue with an instrument in front, to make clear to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not visible and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as the associated cause will be forgotten by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of soap or rag of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and press it strongly against it, making the patient swallow it, as when it reaches the place where the thorns are hidden, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And furthermore, take an eel and swallow it bound, and let it be digested inside for a while, then extract it; or take a pot and put it on the stomach and press on it to draw out the contents.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If those causes are not forgotten as I mentioned earlier, then use a lead instrument in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be as large as a small finger and hollow on one end so that it can easily enter the throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Lift the patient's head upwards and ensure that the instrument touches only the bone of the throat, to ensure that it strikes only the bone or thorn, or the doctor handles it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient swallows the instrument, it is better that they do so, as their knowledge of the location of the associated cause allows them to press it downwards and pull their hand with the instrument upwards, according to the amount prepared before it becomes forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of pus adhering to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the pus is treated with what has been said in the division of the cure and medicines without effect, consider looking inside the throat of the patient at the appropriate time, as you have prepared the tongue with the instrument that you recommend.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see pus, extract it gently and carefully using small or subtle movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, then place fire in the concavity of the cannula and perform this several times (until the pus dies and comes out of the throat) and keep the patient from drinking water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a sponge filled with water and open the mouth of the patient in that place, rinse their mouth with it; do not let anything pass through that place and mix the water every hour with your hand, as the pus is soon detected by the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If the recommended method is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that has been recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will fall.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation of that place is to take an oil pot filled with burning charcoal and cover it halfway with a lid so that there is a hole in the middle, and position the end of the instrument in the hole; then hold the fumigation above the patient; and have the patient keep their mouth closed on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten before you know that the fumigation has reached the pus, as the pus will soon fall out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If the cat does not come out, you should repeat the subfumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, cause them to eat salty and alkaline foods, and not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which arterial bleeding from the ulcer is treated when it is visible; and it resembles forceps in some ways, but it has a certain curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The tool should be placed in the ulcer, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is covered, sharpened with a file, so that it can compress anything that may obstruct it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the opening of ulcers and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are special kinds of wounds in various ways, as memory of them recalls, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They are diverse in the method of their opening and section by two ways, one of which is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and because they obstruct fluids.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is specifically for the places where accidents of the body occur, because an ulcer that occurs in the head is different from an ulcer that occurs in the buttocks; and an ulcer in a fleshy place is different from an ulcer in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Moreover, some ulcers require that they not be opened except when the wound is matured or completed in them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other ulcers that require opening when they are ripe and not before their completion, such as ulcers near joints, because an ulcer near a joint takes longer to heal until the pus that surrounds it is purged, and it weakens or corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or an ulcer on a main part, if you delay opening it until it is matured, it can harm the main part; or one in the buttocks, which should not be opened before it matures; and it is not necessary to open a wound that is not ripe except for a wound in the buttocks, because you cannot insert your finger into it and it can elongate towards the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula is formed or one is made at the edge of it that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Moreover, you must know when to open the ulcer, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and fever stops, and the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpening of the ulcer head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you must know that opening should be done in the place most distant from the ulcer and where pus is coming from healing of the edge.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Opening is sometimes done along the flesh or the body if ulcers are in the groin or feet, and areas of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and in particular, in all places that do not reflect; because in those that reflect, use opening according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the ulcer is in a fleshy place, it is better to allow confirmation of the digestion of it according to its completion, as we have said; because if you open it beforehand, the wound deepens and becomes more inflamed, and the edges of it are hardened and the depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some ulcers are opened according to the thickness of the flesh or body as necessary, or according to what the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small opening, and in large ulcers a large and wide or deep cuts according to the diversity of the size of the ulcers.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other ulcers are those in which it is necessary for the edges to be concave and cut when they are opened in such a way that a pouch or abscess has already formed, like an ulcer that occurs in double areas and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three corners; and of those is one that is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, like ulcers in joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them is one that round and crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	However, one that is not like them, such as superficial ulcers of lions, you should open it with a superficial or flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the ulcer is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should open it and not try to remove all the pus at that time; after removing part of it, leave the ulcer open for another day, and after removing a larger part, make several observations according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is a green-eyed man or woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because animal spirits are weakened by the release of pus many times, and the patient dies, you should not operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and make sure your puncture is accurate where you pierce these abscesses, as you must avoid wounding the surrounding area and consider whether the abscess wound is small or flat, in which case you can use a lancet or an ancient method; but if the abscess is large and the fissures of the puncture are many, you must stop every now and then to allow them all to heal simultaneously.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the abscess is detached from the skin or if you have concaved it in its circumference, you must compress it with an old cloth or thread made from linen, as when bread or razors are sterilized, without moisture; and keep it inside for three days; and apply pressure on it and treat it with what is necessary to prevent infection until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If bleeding occurs during your operation, you provide cold water and wine vinegar in which a linen cloth is soaked, and place it over the location of the multiple bleeding spots observed.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding continues, you must administer treatment and medication as recommended in various locations of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply powder in wine and oil of caution, and place it over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the affected areas are fleshy, you must place powders moistened in water or oil or wine and apply them frequently until the third day, as mentioned earlier, and you should then remove the abscess and prevent it from becoming infected while providing it with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	This is what is required for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already mentioned for each type of abscess and the specific methods of their cure in separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On incision of abscesses that appear on the skin of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On small abscesses on the skin of the head, and those that contain special types of nodes with tunics made for them; and the various types of their locations.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some have pimples, and among those are those that contain moisture similar to pus.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some have moisture resembling flour and similar to them, and among those are those that are hard and lapidary (stony).
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all, and in the extraction of those [things], there is no fear, for the extraction of those things does not hinder archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section of those things is that you use an instrument of the shape which approaches closely to them, called entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	But if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with a section according to its length by means of a shallow incision in the following manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line B up to line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should excise that part which contains the moisture, and be careful not to leave any cause for it whatsoever, because too much observation returns if there remains some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immerse the wound in Egyptian clay if it is present, or, if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with that mixture and leave it until another day, because with this you corrode everything that remains of the skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat the treatment with Egyptian clay several times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause for the skin; then take care of the wound with Egyptian clay until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains greasy nodes, you should incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The incision should have the shape of a cross, and cut it between two lips of the incision and pull it out from all sides, exerting your strength in the extraction of the sac containing it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	However, if your archery is hindered by this, do what I told you earlier.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And treat an abscess with lancing and care according to what I earlier told you; lancing an abscess is easier because it has less blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes these abscesses are in the head of some men who have none of it (humidity); this cause is because I lanced an abscess on an old woman's head like hard, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced, and if anyone struck it, they would be injured.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses occurring in the head, this is not the subject of this chapter, such as abscesses that occur on the heads of children and which you should lance the auricles, but the incision for these shall be a shallow incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body will be relieved at the lower incisions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And take care of them with what is appropriate for their treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses deeply enter the neck and the armpits and the groin, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are divided into two: those that originate from within it and all scrofulas of these are distinguished by their own sac, as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we earlier recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are either hard or soft, those that contain moisture being soft, and those that are malignant should not be treated with care.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you see well-positioned in the Touching, of which the color of what is apparent is similar to that of kelp and is bad throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is movable, it is necessary that you incise it with a shallow incision from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along the line of G to B, and scrape it from all sides, and cut two lips of the kelp with scissors or with a knife if necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, which may adjust your hand to the incision or upset the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or artery and forbid yourself from continuing the operation, you should pause in the wound treated with quicklime or other powders that cause bleeding, clean the wound, and leave it until the acidity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and porous.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated (or drained)
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before it was completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And find out if there are any other small scrofula (abscesses), so that you may incise them and clean them up.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large vein is involved in the abscess, cover it so that you do not incise the abscess at its base.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Bind it well with a strong bandage and let it heal within itself without any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill the wound with old lard (or ointment) that you have already applied, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire abscess, then ensure that you close the two edges of the wound and suture it as soon as possible to prevent any excess leakage.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is an excess leakage due to the large size of the abscess, then understand to incise the base of it, drain it, and provide stitching and treatment for it.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for abscesses containing moisture (pus), make a superficial perforation where the abscess is about to mature and pause the perforation of the pus that rises from the body's base, as we said earlier.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply perforation (or lancing), using lard or similar substances to corrode the infected material.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you see that the wound is clean, care for it with fresh meat-based ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII. (43)
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of a gangrenous appendix in the gallbladder (or abscess).
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this incision on the appendix, and I have never seen it done in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their (ancient) discourse.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with obstruction (of the gallbladder), the removal of the appendix should be avoided, as it does not benefit the patient because all the veins and major vessels are nearby.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have appendixes infected with abscess or gallbladder or double earlobe (gallstones), when the illness is not in the bladder, it is necessary to perform the incision of the appendix to avoid death caused by strangulation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to incise the appendix, we should make the incision three circles from the gallbladder's circles or four with a smaller section along the length between two circles according to size, ensuring that the incision is in the cephac (the body of the gallbladder) and not the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision as it lacks muscle and the veins supplying blood are nearby.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is inexperienced, extend the cord of the gallbladder by an inch and make a split in the cord up to the channel, but avoid veins supplying blood if possible.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And make a split in the cipallus (gallbladder) as recommended; this refers to the incision of the channel through the flap that is at its exit and where there is damage or abscess of the bladder.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So that the fear of perforation is removed, sew together two edges of the cord of the wound and only stitch it without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medicines that make the flesh heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the essence of the recommended discourse is to open the gallbladder of those who have appendixes infected with abscess and the patient has already died, and the intestines are cut, and someone goes to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, I command that the wound be left open until the malice of the illness is consumed, which takes three days; and once this is done, I command to sew up the wound and care for it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen personally is that a woman took a knife and put it in her own gallbladder and incised one part of the lung, and I was called to treat her, and I found the wound infected like the breath of the dying, and I exposed the wound and found that blood was leaking from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I was confessed that she had not incised a vein or ligature, and the wind came from the wound, and I treated it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the woman did not recur in the bladder if there was no improvement in her condition, and another few days were allowed for her recovery.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the incision of the appendix, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV (44)
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the gallbladder outside, which is called a hernia of the gallbladder.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	The abscess called hernia of the gallbladder is a large abscess according to the color of the body and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is according to two methods, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural case, it is not necessary to treat.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental case is according to two methods of which the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the second method is similar to an abscess that is made by the constriction of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is not necessary to make a presumption of the patient unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should investigate that and observe it with the said method, and if you find something similar to fatty nodes, and not suspended from any vein, then you cut it in a way like nodes, and remove it along with the part that contains the skin and bursa; otherwise, you search for its entire existence and take care of the area with something that is needed for healing until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter forty-fifth.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the cutting of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the many types of nodes, I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	It is necessary that I explain the difference between a node and an abscess when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain until the ebullition of excess is stopped; and it is a putrid completion which now stops the fever, pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node does not contain heat, nor fever nor pain; it contains that cyst lion which is at the head.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, it begins like a pimple and is made in the same way as cheese, whether large or small, and they are of two species, whether fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, you expose it and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to its form that will come in the chapter that is close to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	The method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place most moist that you find in the abscess, and you turn your said instrument slowly into it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then you hold your hand as close to the end as the size of the abscess allows, and then remove the instrument and examine what has come out from it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the flowing moisture, whatever its color, is forgotten, you cut it with a superficial incision as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the instrument's probe, you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry it over the incision using a cross-shaped form like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have learned, suspend it on one side and cut the skin all around it with ease, and keep the skin or bag if possible over it and remove the pus from it along with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove the healthy one, and you watch carefully for it to fill up with pus, and then you remove it in pieces until there remains no cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if something remains from it, either a little or too much, the node returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that something small remains from it, you fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and stop it over the abscess cauterized area, and heal the other with another healing until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, you sew together its two lips and heal it with what embroiders it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is pulsating vein at the opposite side, or not pulsating, you take and fill the place with a three-stranded silk that is vitriol and let it rest for two or three days until the wound heals and stops the bleeding of blood; then return to cut what has been broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-sixth.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of probes, and there are three species, one is large, the middle one is smaller, and the other is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the smaller probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, of lead, or tipped with sharp tips, in order to make the probe enter well into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of tips, and they are called alberd, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three spices, for it is great, mild, and scarce.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a very large spice, the form [of this substance] is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a mild substance, [the form] of this is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a scarce substance, [the form] of this is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It should be noted that these are from abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and boils that may originate from bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And make small, large, or lion-shaped drains with these, similar to large needles that are sewn together, and made of copper, iron, silver, or gold. The best ones are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	These drains are made from black plums, which are known to cause the abscesses in their cavities to burst and reflect back on themselves.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three spices, for some are long-lasting, others mild, and others short-lived, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture [narrowness].
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of a large lead spice [or treatment]:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of a mild lead spice [or treatment]:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of a small lead spice [or treatment]:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of scissors are made from different substances, some of which are simple with only a curve and others made from three types: large, scarce, and mild.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some are sharp scissors and others have three types [of blades].
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Some scissors have two curves, and others have three types [of blades].
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Some scissors have three curves, and others have three types [of blades].
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place [for performing various medical procedures].
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple pod, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a large simple medicine pod, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple medicine container, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large empty medicine container:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a small empty medicine container, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a very small empty medicine container, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large medicine container having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a small medicine container having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a very small medicine container having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large medicine container having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small medicine container having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a very small medicine container having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of scalpels and those which are sharpened and curved for cutting nodes and abscesses, and there are three types, as one is large, another small, and another very small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The incisions made where there is cutting are sharp, and the other incisions are not sharpened but are performed cautiously so as to avoid injury to a vein or nerve during the excision of nodes (lumps) or abscesses (pus-filled sacs), and for those the patient is healed, and peace of mind is achieved somewhat through the cauterization that is required after the excision of an abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of gout, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large gout:
Forma de magda migier:	The medium-sized gout form:
Forma de magda pauc:	The small gout form:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	It is outside the affected area that should be pricked with a pointed instrument and covered with ointment on both sides, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatisms, which are hidden among the wounds and require the drainage of abscesses without the patient's perception, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of the following:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of abscesses in which the flow of blood is cut off, and there are three types; large, medium, and small. The forms of these are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are forms of lemon juice, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is necessary that these types of abscesses (small, medium, and large) be drained of blood flow with speed when needed, and at first, there should not be any medication.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, only in fleshy areas, such as the armpits and thighs, and the armpits, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar fleshy areas of the body, and use humidified cotton for this purpose.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some times are the forms of these instruments which are small and resemble fish scalers in this way; with which blood is drained when it is done by venipuncture or arterial puncture.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times are the forms round in this way:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which resemble women's. (Guessing that 'mamillas' means 'breasts', and assuming that the text is discussing medical procedures on male breasts that look like female ones)
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen, you should treat it with rest, like starting to be covered in fur, and if the breasts are swollen and resemble those of women, we will cut them off, leaving them. (Guessing that 'compliment' means 'treatment', 'apostemosas' means 'cut off' and assuming that the text is discussing removal of overly swollen male breasts)
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the person who has this, it is necessary to make an incision in that breast with a semi-circular shape according to this form from line B to line G, and then remove all the lump, fill the wound with carnation medicine, sew up the edges of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals. (Guessing that 'inscidisca' means 'make an incision', 'excorja' means 'remove', 'plagua' means 'wound', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat overly swollen male breasts)
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	However, if the breast goes towards the armpit and is softened by its size like in women, then it should be cut into two pieces along with your upper parts, with two semi-circular incisions, one contained within the other according to this form from line B to line G. And remove the connective tissue that is between the edges of the wound, and remove the excess fat, and administer what was previously mentioned for suturing and the powders necessary for the healing process until it heals. (Guessing that 'declina' means 'goes towards', 'mollificada' means 'softened', 'figura lunar' means 'semicircular shape', 'codena' means 'connective tissue' and assuming that the text is providing further instructions on how to treat overly swollen male breasts)
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make due to the patient's distress and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with clean water and let it soak in corrosive ointment until the rotten part is removed by the corrosion, and then care for it until it heals. (Guessing that 'huemplas' means 'fill', 'enguent' means 'clean water', 'corrosiu' means 'corrosive', assuming that the text is discussing what to do when an incision on a breast wound is not completed due to the patient's distress or bleeding)
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48. (Assuming that 'Capitol' is a chapter number, and moving on to the next sentence for translation)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from the armpits. (Assuming that 'perforacio' means 'perforation', guessing that 'apostemas' means 'abscesses', and assuming that the text is discussing a medical procedure related to armpit-originated abscesses)
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the armpits belong to the species of scrofulas, hard ones that contain a pus sac. (Assuming that 'specias' means 'species', guessing that 'scrophulas' refers to a type of disease or growth, and assuming that the text is classifying certain types of armpit-originated abscesses)
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a semi-circular shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus has been evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with clean linen and leave it for another day. (Assuming that 'humiditatz' means 'moisture', guessing that 'seccio lunar' refers to a semi-circular shape again, and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat certain types of armpit-originated abscesses that contain moisture)
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And leave the wound open and let it heal with suitable clean water until it heals. (Assuming that 'coto' means 'wound', guessing that 'enguent' means 'clean water', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat an abscess after its pus has been evacuated)
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes or scrofulas, then you should cut into it as was previously mentioned in the section on scrofulas. (Assuming that 'nodes' means 'lymph nodes', guessing that 'species' means 'type', and assuming that the text is repeating instructions for treating certain types of abscesses)
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to the extent that it exudes pus, then administer it with hot iron as was previously mentioned. (Assuming that 'plagua' means 'wound', guessing that 'yesca' means 'exudes', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat a wound that has become infected and is producing pus)
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49. (Assuming that this is a chapter number, and moving on to the next sentence for translation)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or veins. (Assuming that 'seccio' means 'incision', guessing that 'arceria' refers to archery, and assuming that the text is discussing a medical procedure related to abscesses caused by injuries sustained during archery)
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the archery is broken and the bandage that covers it becomes consolidated, then swellings occur and an abscess appears. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein are: for when the abscess is due to the archery, it extends along the front of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a grating sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is rounded at the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If the incision on this abscess is erroneous, and particularly in those where the bladder is present, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in various parts of the body; and if it is large, therefore its healing should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When it is due to inflammation of the opening of the archery, make a long incision in the bandage; and cut open the incision with scissors and approach the archery, and free it from the layers up to where it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the needle on top of that and make it penetrate into the other side, and firmly press the archery in two places - which causes you to extract two archeries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And press on the area between two ligaments with a lancet and introduce sponge into it until the blood comes out, which will resolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer healing when there is pus between the ligaments; and treat that with appropriate healing until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to section of a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the bandage, and introduce the needle into the area where your hand is, making it penetrate; and double thread through that until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligament as I told you in the grape-shaped ligament of two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear extracting the thread, then introduce the needle into the entire abscess before making the incision of the first needle, and firmly press your fingers in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Cut the abscess in the middle of it until that which is inside comes out, then you incise the excess of the bandage, and leave what remains attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on the pulp that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer healing which is made with warm and appropriate substances until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess occurs in the archery and vein, and similarly it occurs in the nerves when it occurs by striking or excessive work, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The most common place for this is in the joints of the fingers or the ankle, or any place where there are bad joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The abscess is severe and is similar to the color of another body, and it is in the larger ones that are placed close together and when it is tight with pain, the patient feels as if he is in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	This abscess is not extended along the front of the body, and therefore the bandage is left open, and it is bad in every direction and does not go to the front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, because it will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead is bandaged with sponge.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then take care of it with lancets and incise it from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then you hang it with a hook and extract it, and place it in oil; and sew the wound with suture, and treat that until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	After opening the abdomens of some men and various parts of the bodies of those whose illness is called fungus because it is similar to that with mushrooms; the root is subtle but its head is large; and the lips of these are turned inward, and it is small and very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have already seen one, and in his abdomen there were two that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in color, of small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	The lips of those [things] were turned inwards and splitting, and moisture was flowing out from it all the time. (My apologies for any potential inaccuracies due to my non-native speaker status.)
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then, insert your fingers eighteen inches deep into it. (I am guessing "it" refers to the affected area.) And the other one (finger) five inches. (It seems like they are asking for two fingers to be inserted for different depths.)
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure for inserting them (fingers) is that you consider whether the patient is moist and the color of their sore is white, moist, and of a subtle quality; in such a case, you should insert spatula made of lead, and there should be cautionery in your presence in the fire because many observed views show that the expulsion of pus is often blood, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it. (I am assuming "it" refers to the affected sore.)
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is weak and fearful, beware of inserting iron (instruments); instead, take a fresh lead file and press it against the sore, using the method mentioned earlier, and leave it for two days. (My apologies if this translation has any errors due to my non-native speaker status.)
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the thin lead string (suture) at the constriction of the sore; therefore, you should not press hard on the thick part of the lead, until it is cut off and falls out by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the sore is of large size and there is cause for fear and dread when inserting it, especially in the abdomen,
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you may cut through the thickness of it (the sore), and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then take care of it until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Be careful not to insert your fingers into a sore that is dark in color, has little sensation, and has no regular flow of pus, as it is cancerous. (This sentence seems to warn against probing cancerous lesions.)
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember that this concerns the matter of cancer. (I am assuming that "this" refers to the previous warning about cancerous lesions.)
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 11. (I'm assuming that "Capitol" is a reference to the chapter number, which appears to be in Latin numerals rather than Arabic numerals.)
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of umbilical protrusion. (It seems like the text discusses various medical procedures and their applications, and this sentence indicates a new topic about umbilical hernia.)
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical protrusion is caused by many factors; either due to fissures of the navel that are above the abdomen and the intestine or hernia comes out from it as in other ruptures, or due to pus flowing from a vein or artery (as previously mentioned), or due to compressed ventilation in it. (I'm assuming "it" refers to the umbilicus.)
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the hernia protrudes slightly from the skin, then the color of the abscess should be similar to that of the body, and there is no pain, but it appears in various situations. (This sentence seems to describe the symptoms of an umbilical hernia with a slight protrusion.)
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the hernia protruding, then you must locate its situation with regard to that which was previously described, in a more serious and diverse manner; when you press on it with your fingers as mentioned earlier, it is hidden, and it should return; there is significant pain at that place, and you must introduce hot baths and strong work. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to deal with an umbilical hernia that protrudes more significantly.)
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, there should be no pain when pressed with your hand and it is not constricted nor hardened. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to diagnose an umbilical hernia caused by moisture.)
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to pus, then you will observe the following signs of the abscess turning darker in color. (It seems like the text describes the appearance of an umbilical hernia caused by pus.)
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to a mass of flesh, then the abscess will be severe, large, and hard, and it will grow according to a certain amount. (This sentence seems to describe the characteristics of an umbilical hernia caused by a mass of flesh.)
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to ventilation issues, then there should be no pain when touched. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to diagnose an umbilical hernia caused by ventilation problems.)
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The procedure for it (the umbilical hernia) is that you consider whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to pus from an artery, a vein, or ventilation issues; in such cases, you should be prohibited from treating it because there is fear and dread as previously taught in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins. (This sentence seems to summarize the previous discussion on umbilical hernias and warn against treating them in certain circumstances.)
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the umbilical protrusion is due to the intestine or the hernia, you must command the patient to lie down and extend themselves; then press on the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands, and surround the umbilicus with a spatula made of lead around the area that you have marked with the probe; and stretch the thickness of the abscess at the incisions above one inch; and tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord, using an appropriate knot. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to treat an umbilical hernia caused by the intestine or the hernia itself.)
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Approach the midline of the abscess extended over the wound and insert your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; if you have not found it or guarded it by the wound, then you extract the pus and push the intestine towards the incisions inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have found the membrane (tela), then take an uncus (a probe or stick); and incise the superfluity (surplus) of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them firmly in the flesh and pierce two holes through the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and tightly bind the abscess into four sections over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh shrink back into its place by itself; or incise that which is thinning and falling apart, and carefully treat it with water that comes from the mouth until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence (protrusion) of the navel is not much flesh or because of moisture, then you must suck out the abscess as we have said and strain the pus or moisture, which you place in it, and treat it with water that comes from the mouth and consoles the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	On treating scrofula (scrofula).
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division that scrofula has a specific type and the way to treat it with medicine, and we have said that it is suspicious when cured with iron so as not to be ulcerated; and we have said that scrofula originates in the womb (uterus) and the caution of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that in some cases scrofula can be eradicated, such as on the skull (cranium) located at the breasts or its resemblance to other members that are used to drain it all, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you do not need to worry about it, as I cannot heal it or have not seen anyone else who has achieved this result.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation on it (scrofula) is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and let the patient rest and purge black bile for some days, and then fumigate it, if there is a clear filling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Prepare the patient with preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare needles that are necessary for it; and in all ways, compress with a cloth good percrucitation (application of hot objects) until there is no cause left for its reasons.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Allow the pus to run out, and do not open it lightly, but press on the places, and wash away the thick pus with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is opposition to a large, uncontrolled bleeding of a vein or an artery, then cauterize it where the blood flow ceases, and care for it with other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	The first sentence in this new text appears to be a reference to a specific section or chapter (Capitol .liv.) within a larger medical text. This is often used as a way to organize long treatises, especially in medieval and classical works. Here's the translation for the provided line:
De curacio de ydropici.	The new sentence appears to provide the title or topic of the following text (De curacio de ydropici). Translation:
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the types of edema caused by water and their signs, as well as the treatment of each type with medicines. Here's the translation:
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The type that is treated with iron is none other than the species of edema caused by albumin alone, and it should not be treated with iron in the case of tympanic or hypoarchic edema, as this is fatal. Here's the translation:
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When treating the species of tympanic edema with medicines and it does not improve, you should consider that if the patient has already experienced debility or another type of edema, such as in cases of cough or stomach ailments similar to these, then be careful not to treat with iron, as there is concern about this. Here's the translation:
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	However, if you see the patient with excessive vitality and there is no other disease besides edema alone, and neither a child nor an elderly person, then the manner of operation for them is to raise the patient on your hands, place their abdomen exposed to you, press the water out from the lower part of the navel, and take a piece of sharp-pointed reed according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The reed piece should be of two sharp points, with one end as sharp as a reed; however, it should be somewhat short, so that in the operation you do not enter the intestine and hurt it. Here's the translation:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, as in this case you must, with the incision, move away from the navel by about three fingers' width below, on the right side over the navel. Here's the translation:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	However, if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width. Here's the translation:
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. Here's the translation:
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Your incision must be over the rib that the patient will lie on to prevent fluid from accumulating at that location. Here's the translation:
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the entire cord with the instrument and enter the incision, lift your hand with the reed between the cord and the abdominal wall and cut it out; if it is as thick as a nail or more. Here's the translation:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the siphon (or siphac) to where the reed reaches the water location. Here's the translation:
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you extract it and insert an instrument with this form: Here's the translation:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver, copper, or brass, with a small hole at the lower end, and three holes on the sides: two on one side and one on the other; and the inscised end is shaped like a quill, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the upper part of the insertion is the armillary, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately close it on the instrument, thus evacuating an appropriate amount of water, for if you evacuate more than needed at any given time, the patient may die prematurely due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they could experience convulsions that are close to death. Here's the translation:
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	However, evacuate it according to the vitality of the patient and based on your understanding of their disposition, pulse, and general well-being. Here's the translation:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Approach the instrument, and retain the water that causes it to be held back by the bandage around the neck of the bladder, which you are recommended to perform according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Approach the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and draw out a small amount of water, do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to let the water remain too much.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear the patient, and allow a large amount of water to remain, then care for it with burial in hot sand, rub with soap, and wait for a long time in the sun; cure it with drying medications until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the water extraction, as I have previously reported.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose locations for urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's abdomen, and the head of the mix-up is not perforated (or it is too narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform perforation as soon as possible when the child is born with a thin spatula-like instrument according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then pause in the wound a thin leaden nail and tie it, and wait for three days or more.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the child wishes to urinate and urinates, return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes through the area does not close this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the wound is narrow, it should be treated with a leaden nail as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the wound is not in its place, these should be treated by lifting the penis with the hand towards the parts outside; and it is not for generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should according to nature, and this is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should be turned on his back, and the head of the penis should be extended from it with your left hand with a strong extraction; then cut the head of the penis where the foreskin is located with a sharp instrument like a feather or any blade, so that the meat of it becomes similar to the head of the penis and the wound falls into its proper place as necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation of bleeding, because it often happens; pause and let the blood flow out, then stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 16.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On whitening that happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and scabs, darkening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whitening occurs on the penis and is a sign of serious illness.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malicious, and the other is not malicious.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malicious, it is necessary that you suspend it with thin thread and remove it completely; then pause over the area submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply Egyptian ointment to it every day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the whitening is malicious, with a dark color, it is necessary that you administer cautery near its incision and remove it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitening is in the foreskin on the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin, and the other part is outside; it is necessary that you remove the whitening from inside first until it is consolidated; then you treat the outside, because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, it is not ensured that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Also whitening, blackness, and corruption in the genitals and foreskin often happens, so it is necessary that you remove all that has already been damaged or is about to become corrupted or is already corrupted; then line the area with a mixture made of honey and the flour of milled wheat and crushed herbs and spices.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then care for it with the other treatment until it becomes healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If blood flow occurs, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery is beneficial in two ways: for stopping blood flow and for treating an infected wound.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the penis rots and is destroyed at that time, it is necessary for you to insert a lead tube into the foreskin of the patient so that he urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this does not occur except in one who is circumcized, and it occurs without being forced; when the adhesion occurs due to an infection or a boil), it is necessary that you cut through with a blunt spatula until the adhesive tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to desire that (the foreskin), it is necessary that you cut through with a spatula for the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when thin, can be easily perforated due to its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp blade, which has been moistened in warm water to prevent them from sticking together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then treat it with a styptic until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a permanent solution like other diseases; however, since it is our operation and our will, and the need for it is particularly in children, it is necessary to choose the best method and easiest way to preserve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and they only started using it after experimenting with it, which was due to the fact that I have found that most artisans and barbers used circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they used oil and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and will not find a better purification method using scissors, oil, and the finger, because most of the time the skin is torn up, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains behind, and it can easily be punctured again and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is done by the alphecatis (the female circumciser), and it is digital, which is used by shoemakers, is not secure because there is a risk of injury to the tip of the male organ since it can enter the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation using the finger, iron will be exposed and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The skin of the child is short by nature, and most of the time it does not require purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification that is done with scissors and oil using the finger is not good, because the scissors are made for proportional incision, so the sharpness at the top is the same as the sharpness at the bottom; therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate pressure points, you cut it in a single stroke; and this leads to compression of the oil around the penis from all sides, which can cause errors.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you keep the child (especially if it is a small one) in a state of rest and do not perform any incision on it except for applying oil to the penis and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the child happy in every way that is possible according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Prepare yourself to stand between your hands, neither too close nor too far apart; hide the forceps in your hand or put them aside so that the child does not see them or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Prepare yourself to place your hand between the buttocks of the patient and blow into the wound, then pull it out so that the head of the penis emerges, and clean off any matter attached to it due to filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Fold the designated area with a needle and tie a knot close to it with two threads; then take hold of the knot and draw it tight, binding the wound tightly between the two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Lift the scrotum slightly and stretch the foreskin, then let a little blood flow out, which is better; and sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place a cloth in which is spread mugwort oil diluted in rosewater known as "oil of roses"; leave this on for a day, and treat it with treatment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The nails should not be cutting or uncut, and the nail of the big toe should not be cut, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But if the error is made during cleaning by injuring the scrotum internally or cutting it, then one must sew it up again.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch the finger of your hand in front of the wound and sew it up accordingly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a hook and sew it up.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has passed three days and the swelling remains under the foreskin wound, you should let it be released with the cautery and then remove it gently, sewing it up as you are prepared to do so.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the penis, because this is not for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, treat it with a powder that consolidates the wound as recommended in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the scrotum is sewn up too tightly, observe the parts above it to see if there is any swelling.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But treat it with that which was mentioned earlier until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or blood clots, or tumors or ulcers, similar to those mentioned in the section on methods of treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and the obstruction in the bladder is due to a stone already in its neck, then the patient must be placed on all fours.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their knees and stretch out their belly from the part above their knees, and have the patient bend forward as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is constricted to force out the stone through the back, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the stone is not dissolved with what has been mentioned before and the cause is very strong in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it using an instrument called a syringe, whose form is as follows: It should be made of silver and be slightly concave like the needle of an eagle pen, with a thickness similar to that of one finger and a half, with a thin tube at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine through the syringe is to grab the foreskin and pull it back into the area where the linen or wool is located, with good lubrication; then insert the eyelids of the foreskin into the area behind the syringe, and if necessary, sew any cause of the linen using forceps, but insert the linen into the tube with vigor. Then move the syringe slowly and steadily towards the body and apply oil or albumen of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Hold the patient on the bed and wrap the bladder and penis with olive oil and water. And apply alum water to it.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis over to the place of the anus; then push the syringe into that area; and continue pushing it towards the bladder, so that the patient is relieved of the cause of pain, but not in this order, but rather in the direction that leads to error.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Approach the field (wound) with wool slowly, for urine wets the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Approach the bladder with a remedy for urination, and use a catheter, do not stop doing that until the bladder is drained and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Title: The Treatise on Medical Matters - Chapter 16
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of what quality is the cleansing of the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this procedure?
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is congealed blood in that area, or there is a hard stone blocking it, and you want to drain water and medicine into that area, then do so with an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the outside part is closed, it is blocked (or obstructed).
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	There are three parts in that: two of one kind, sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is a concave area where there is a buildup of pus, depending on its amount, without any addition, until some cause is pulled from the humors, and when it is expelled, water should be poured into it, and when it is expelled for a long time, according to what the catheter made with naphta in naval battles can do.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, to allow the water to flow into the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the pus, and draw out the water that is buildup in the upper parts, for the water is drained into the concavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the catheter; then draw out the pus with water, for that pus reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient relieves himself.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin cystic instrument with which the bladder is cystoscopied, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is shaped like a small feather, and inside it there is a long, slender canal.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then grab the bladder with forceps, and stop the flow of urine that you want to cystoscope in the bladder, and place a double ligature around it with strong suture thread, and heat up the urine.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the cystoscope into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then press your hand on the bladder with urine and structure until the patient feels that the urine has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; perforate the entire circumference; and forcefully insert a strong wire into those holes, so that they rotate; then attach the circle in such a way as to form a plug, as long as you stop the flow of water, oil, and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that to the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, and press your hand into it until the urine reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Title: The Treatise on Medical Matters - Chapter 17
De extraccio de peyra.	On Stone Extraction
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their cure with medications, and the difference between stones originating in the lungs and those originating in the bladder, as well as the signs of this condition.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also discussed the surgery and cutting for stone removal.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone originating in the bladder is the one that lodges in the bladder itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	They are telling of an obvious and abbreviated exposure (of the issue).
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, stones originating in the bladder are found mainly in children; and their signs are that the urine that is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in gravel; and the patient scratches his genitals, and observes blood-stained bedding, and the stools become loose, and for this reason he protrudes his anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	The healing of children from that condition is up until they reach the age of 14; and it is difficult to heal in the old (people).
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it is mitigated by this (medication or condition).
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And the stone that is larger and the healing is easier in that one; and if it is little, it opposes (or worsens) that condition.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we approach the healing of that condition, at the beginning, we must clean the patient with a cruse (basin) which extracts all the wound which is in his intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the finding of the stone and requires its search.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then let the patient be placed with his feet and be examined and washed in the area to force the stone to descend towards the opening of the bladder or it jumps from that location on some occasions.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And prepare that instrument in your hands and have the assistants move away from him, so that the entire bladder is made to descend towards the side of below (or outlet).
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then pierce it (the stone) and all its surrounding area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly make an incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you do not touch it completely from below, then you should anoint it with oil on your left hand, if the patient is a child, or rub it if he is an adult, and place it in his rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then pierce the stone that was below (or inside) your hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert it (the stone) towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your hand and expel it from the opening outside the bladder at the location where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; command another servant to extend the thighs to the opening above, and command another servant to lift the loincloth that is below the thighs, at the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert the spatula with this shape (a small cup or bowl-like spatula):
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Make the incision between the anus and the genitals, not too deep, following the curve of the left side; the incision should be on that stone and your hand should be in the rectum, making a transverse incision so that the opening is wide outside and narrow inside according to the amount of stone exposed at that location, but not too wide as it would compress the hand holding the stone, and this must be done easily without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that some stones have angles and edges, making their extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that stone (the one mentioned earlier) comes the lion-shaped one that resembles a walnut and is round and made of soft material easily extracted.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, position it in the fissure (or slit or narrow opening).
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it is not easily positioned, then you should press on it or apply pressure to it gently with a suitable instrument, whose tip should be like a rasp applied to the stone and not slip away from it; or place a curved thin instrument below it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on it, then you should widen the wound a little and, if you see blood flow, cauterize it with heated vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, you should first press your hand against the opening of the bladder and make an incision over it; then press a little on it as well; perform the same steps if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance consists in making an incision too big because it may harm the patient in one of two ways: either cause his death or lead to continuous urine distillation due to insufficient consolidation of the area.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion from inside (the bladder) when it is appropriate, or force it to break with forceps from inside until it is removed in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloespoke and dragon's blood, and bind it (the wound) tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place on that cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil and warm water, to encourage the abscess to be released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not undo the bindings for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have undone the bindings, wash the area with water and oil, and treat it with a poultice of diaphoretic and diuretic herbs until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	However, if an abscess forms in the wound, it should be treated with cautery and corrosive agents, similar to when blood is frozen in the bladder, and thus urine is prohibited (and this is known as hematuria or blood in urine), therefore, pour your solution into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to decay and rot.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the wound with warm water, soap, and salt, and apply an ointment that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire healing process, you should pay attention to the patient's needs and adjust the medication that has been applied to the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, and it causes urinary retention, then treat it with a solution that will cause it to pass, for prolonged observation of this condition is considered as causing obstruction; I have previously stated this, and it is known that you should use a perforating iron, which has the following shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular with an elongated tip, sharp, inserted into a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then grab the stone with forceps, and remove it from the bladder to prevent it from returning.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the bladder and perforate it easily until the perforating iron reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Rotate the perforating iron around the small stone with your hand, and you will gradually make a hole in it until the other end of the perforator passes through; for the urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on the broken piece of the stone that is outside the bladder, as it has been crushed and forgotten by the urine; and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this treatment is not possible for any reason that prevents it, then grab the stone with one pair of forceps and another pair on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut the stone in the bladder between two incisions.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then undo the bindings and remove the congealed blood from the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bind the stone to the foot, except if it does not return to the bladder, and the other binding is not for the purpose that when the stone approaches the opening of the bladder, the stone will return to its place and heal the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason when you bind the stone above it, you should lift the bandage above the separation, or if you need to remove the stone, you must lower the bandage and heal the wound in this way as has been said.
Capitol .lxi.	This appears to be a numbering system for chapters or sections within the treatise. In medieval manuscripts, chapters were often not numbered consecutively, but rather assigned individual numbers. It's possible that "capitol" is a translation of the Latin word "capitulum," meaning chapter or section.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Title: On the removal of bladder stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Bladder stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a bladder stone is found in any of those [women], the cure is difficult and forbidden because of many reasons.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that a woman who is still a virgin experiences great pain.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to discover [the stone] if she does not tell the doctor when she is a virgin or from those women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you have no experienced woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with more mastery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for bladder stones in women is far from the stone's location, requiring deep incisions and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to this, then you must take a woman who is skilled and experienced in this matter. This is rare.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that [skilled woman], then you must seek one who is experienced and knowledgeable, or present a mature woman skilled in the care of women, or a woman who has mastered part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present this matter and command her to do everything that you instruct her regarding the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that she must check if the woman is a virgin, in which case she should put her own words into the woman's mouth and desire the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that, dismiss her from her words, and then command her to make an incision on it [the stone].
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to put her own words into the mouth of the patient and inquire about the stone, with her left hand pressing on the bladder, and grasp it with good discernment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that [the stone] is in the orifice of the bladder near the separation, you must gently guide it out of the opening with the help of your skill until it reaches the correct location.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision in that area of the hand of the mature woman, and find the location of the stone from any side it is positioned at, and center the stone on that separation. Let the words of the patient not be removed from the stone that has been expelled.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the lancet into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the size that you know the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the varieties of bladder stones are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know the types of stones through what you have said about what you intend to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see blood flow, adjust the location with the vitriol-treated instrument and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation once the stone has been extracted.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the treatment of bladder stones in men, to help you with your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of the blood is due to the artery being incised, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with pills and astringents, but do not repeat this; instead, leave the stone and do not extract it, for great pain will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the flow of blood has subsided after several days and the wound is healed, then return to your operation once the stone has been extracted.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (sixty-two)
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Title: Incision on hernia of the scrotum.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aiguoza is not anything other than an addition of moisture in the white cavity (abdomen) which remains uncovered by the genital girdle containing the intestines, and it is called a hernia and named as a cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is in the proper abdomen that nature has prepared for the intestines at their point of exit, until it becomes another intestine; and it is the girdle of the genitals between the white cavity (abdomen) which we have mentioned earlier, and not just anything.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, because it is gradually turning into yellow, red, purple, black and slimy, or white and watery, and this is what is more common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is: because if it is in the white cavity (abdomen) that we have mentioned earlier, then the abscess (pustule) is rounded and gradually decreasing in length like a figure of an intestine, and the genitals are visible, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper abdomen, then the abscess (pustule) is rounded at the point of exit of the intestines and from this it is believed that it is another intestine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the girdle of the genitals and the white cavity (abdomen), then make an incision below the navel.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should express the color of the moisture in the abscess (pustule) after it has been cut open and its form has appeared; and according to what comes out from within the abscess, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the healing of it (hernia), you must order the patient that he should be bled if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty him of his contents.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And lay something soft on his back for a short time or a while, and place some cloth under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And place yourself to the left of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who should extend his arm from one side to the other at the girdle of the genitals and at the point of exit of the intestines.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take broad spatula (tongue depressor) and divide the girdle of the genitals from its middle to a distance close to the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision according to the rule, with a straight edge, at a distance from the line of the hair on the genitals, until it reaches the white cavity (abdomen).
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise it (the intestine or hernia), observe, and pay attention so that you do not incise it (hernia); and your excision with which you have excised it by the middle should be suspended in the most intestine (small intestine) as thinly and carefully examine the excision according to its quantity as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the abdomen full of water with a large perforation and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two labia (lips) of the incision with stitches, and extend the abdomen at its edges; and do not touch the girdle of the genitals, and incise the abdomen in the way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Incise it (the intestine or hernia) completely or in pieces, and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the intestine proceeds from outside of its girdle during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the abdomen, return it (the hernia) inside and then sew together the two labia (lips) of the genital girdle with sutures, and care for it like other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the intestine corrupted by another illness, then you should remove the instruments that are holding it suspended and extract the intestine, and care for it as mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done in the other one; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then you should do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you should stop the bleeding and go into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and put another wool that has been immersed in wine and oil on top of it, and spread it over two genitals and the navel; and place thin cotton cloths and powder on top of them and underneath with the following linen:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths should be pressed and filled with woolen batting of this type; and they should be made at the edges where pressure is applied by cotton or wet wool, and attached to the waist of the undergarments. One edge should take hold of the buttock between the two, and the other at the split of the scrotum, and two edges on each side on both sides and two edges elsewhere on both sides, and the entire structure should be adjusted in the waist of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation for the next sentence: "And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery at a point of incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautioner's knife and cut the scrotum, and ignite it as soon as the white chalk containing water has been exposed, and then you take cautioner in this way:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the white chalk, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch the white chalk with scissors, and cut it, and burn it with a fine cautery; incise it as much as possible until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more secure and further from bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you encounter an abscess during the operation of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you must take care of the one that is harmful to you, with treatment appropriate for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I recommend; and it should be certain that you, according to what has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must hold the patient over some raised cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a narrow channel and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough for all the water to run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place it on a cushion and let it rest there, to allow the remaining water to run out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If the problem is the expulsion of water from the wound at that time, you do not proceed with this, but rather because the white cloth in the orifice of the wound prevents and prohibits the emission of water, it is necessary to place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the water can be extracted, the shape of which is described; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is collected approximately two months or even more; and when it has been collected, you should pierce it according to the method described earlier, because the patient will then pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision of fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this hernia there is fear of losing it to danger in the greatest preparations; because I consider its release and being saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case and the properties of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses arise in the bodies where the genitals are composed and this is done for various reasons: either from acute bitter excess, which is absorbed into the genitals, or from injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A flat abscess is hardened, the color of which is dark, and it does not open up.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, as its memory has been perceived earlier, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not have to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed by any cause due to pressure with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that incision can be made on this type and on other flesh; and it is that you cut the scrotum, and place oil at the openings above, and extract that from the white chalk, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensory one that you remove from all the openings of the oil.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the oil has been consolidated with those fleshy parts, you must remove the oil and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion for any reason to the white chalk or between vessels, you must remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is native flesh at the site of the adhesion that is behind it, you must incise everything that is of it, and extract the oil as has been said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	It seems that this text might be part of a medical manuscript, possibly from the Middle Ages, based on its language and the topic of the texts provided. However, without additional context or information about the original manuscript, it's impossible to accurately identify the specific work this text is from. The text appears to be discussing treatments for various medical conditions such as gout and hernias, and providing instructions for surgeries and wound care.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This sentence appears to be part of the same text as the previous sentences, possibly continuing a discussion about medical treatments. It translates to: "On the treatment of hernia." It seems that this manuscript is discussing various medical conditions and their corresponding treatments in medieval times. The use of Latin-like language suggests a European origin for the text. However, without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to provide a precise translation of this sentence alone.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The patient has an abscess enclosed by some membrane resembling scrotum with testicular softening, and it makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient. This sentence continues the discussion of medical conditions and their symptoms in the text. It translates to: "The patient has an abscess enveloped by some membrane resembling scrotum with testicular softening, which makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient."
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is done with caution due to the fear associated with it. This sentence seems to continue discussing the treatment of the medical condition mentioned earlier. It translates to: "And in the treatment of this illness, it is performed with caution due to the fear associated with it."
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must first perform the operation as described earlier. This sentence suggests that the author of this text is providing instructions for a specific surgical procedure or treatment. It translates to: "However, we must first perform the operation as described earlier." Without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to accurately identify the specific work this text is from.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you must cut the patient on an elevated couch; and then loosen the suspenders of the testicles at the sides; and then tie the lower part of the genitals with cords that are known to be effective at the anus; and have another servant hold them apart, extending them violently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a sharp instrument along the vein until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then remove all the fatty tissue from that side as I said in the extraction of the arcerectasis, which are located in the temple.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a double-pointed needle into that area and let it go in at the first of the places where you found the abscess, and let the other end be seen on the other side.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle along a straight line according to the length of the body, and remove what has been added due to putrid and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the wound with other treatments to ensure that the blood vessels are not damaged, as it is not harmful for one of the testicles to be removed.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if the testicles are involved in all cases, you must remove or damage the testicles along with the vessels to cut off all nutrition and stop their function, as they are not beneficial for that patient.
Capitol .lxv.	This suggests that the previous section of text ended with a chapter, and this is the beginning of another chapter in the manuscript or document. The numbering system is common in many medieval texts to help organize and reference the information. Without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to accurately identify the specific work this text is from. However, based on the language and topic, it appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various medical conditions and their corresponding treatments.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the care of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia is by a section that penetrates into the abdomen from the sides of the abdominal muscles due to which the intestines protrude through the rupture of one or more of the intestinal sacs.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be due to the cephalic or the external part of it, and such a thing can happen in two ways for various reasons: by blows, by falls, by shouts, by an elevation caused by some grave condition, or something similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of such (rupture), when it is due to the cephalic, is that it happens gradually over a long time, not suddenly, and it is an abscess formed around the hernia because the cephalic compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of such (rupture), when it is due to the section of the cephalic, is that at the beginning it causes a strong sudden pain; and the abscess appears in various places other than the natural opening, which is indeed the intestine itself, and the body swells in the parts outside the cephalic.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases the intestine is forgotten and this hernia is called strangulated intestinal hernia, zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases it is done with the windbag (enema), and in some cases the intestine tears, and it remains, and this is a very serious danger to the patient, and in some cases it causes bad and worsening pain especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, fear arises, so that care should be taken to avoid hunting in such a case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for such is to command the patient to return the intestine with his own hands inside its cavity, if he can, and to place a bandage over it on its backside, and raise the legs upwards.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Place a bandage that cuts the opening of the scrotum in half, and cut through the scrotum completely from top to bottom; and insert two fingers into the incision as needed to divide the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the incision is made according to the amount that you can possibly forget about that (the intestine).
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Place the hernia sac outside the scrotum until the white hard cephalic is found in each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	You insert your finger into the hernia sac that is between the white cephalic and the testicle, and separate the cephalic according to its position, and free it from any adhesion that is in the back of the hernia sac.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Place your hand on the scrotum in each part, and with that extend the white cephalic in each place with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the cephalic to the incision site; and command the assistant to stretch the hernia sac and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Search for any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cephalic.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find such a cause, then remove it from the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Place a needle in which the thickness is six threads, and insert it through the back of the cephalic, which is below the scrotum, the incision; and cut the extremities that protrude from the thread until there are four threads, and place some stitches on them in the manner of a cross, and tie it strongly with two knots to the cephalic that we have mentioned which is below the scrotum.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Place the ends of the threads and tie them strongly together to prevent any of the vessels that irrigate those areas from causing an abscess.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Wait another period of time according to the first binding, about three days; and with these two bindings, leave the cephalic that is below the scrotum a thickness equal to the finger, and cut everything remaining roundly, and leave the testicle.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Place an incision in the back of the scrotum according to the section that flows blood and pus as we have recommended in what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Place a linen bandage soaked in oil and wait on the wound; and administer the binding that we have recommended (and sometimes the white cephalic is cauterized, which has been mentioned to prevent blood flow, as this often happens), and leave the binding until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If hunting is delayed, soak the wound in hot water and wait on it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Care for the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia ventosa (windbag).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been seen to be cured by surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	At first they said that the hernia due to water should be treated thus as we have recommended in hernia with urine; which is to tie the vessels near the incision with ease; and to cut in the middle where the abscess is formed around it, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Tend to the wound according to what has been said until it heals.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 77.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the incision made in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some frequent occurrences involve rupture in the ankles as we said before, and moreover...
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not allow the causes of hernias to reach the genitals; and if they do, it is rare; and always return them to their place.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if it lasts for a long time, a slit is made in the scrotum before the hernia enters the scrotum; this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum which is in the ankles as we said before, and this condition arises because the scrotum is extended, softened, and becomes inflamed and swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cautery, as I will now explain.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the treatment is performed by iron in this manner: and the patient lies on their back with their legs held apart, and the affected area of the hernia inflammation is dried out using linen cloths soaked in wine or vinegar, and then a small incision is made over the swelling with a knife according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And apply a white linen cloth underneath the scrotum until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the scrotum and press it against the lower abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And apply sutures to the two prominent areas at the end of the scrotum using a thread.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And remove the end of the rod completely, and do not cut into the scrotum or extend the incision any further, nor cause any other damage as you know in treating an internal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that with the treatment of abscesses, and when you make the incision, cleanse it and restore the abscess to its original state until it is healed; for the scrotum contracts and the prominence of rupture is not corrected.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In certain men, the scrotum of the testicles becomes softened because the flesh between it is softened, and its treatment should be given attention to.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one treating the condition to make the patient lie on his side, and completely separate the scrotum that has become softened from the natural scrotum; and then sew together two lips with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and secure a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then close the incision between the stitches, and care for other afflictions until they are healed and the pain subsides.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is prohibited by our law, but for the sake of my memory I recall it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except in two ways: one because the doctor who is asked about it knows its treatment if it occurs; and the other way is that we often have need for castration of other animals for the benefit of our use, such as with horses, cattle, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision and sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method of strangulation, the procedure is to seize the animal by its tail before its testicles are softened and lined up.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then hold them with your hand until they become resolved and do not appear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration by incision and sectioning, it is necessary that you have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the spermatic cord and make an incision over each vessel to a depth of two fingers.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And make an incision in any pus that you may have to drain it.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause for the abscess, but only the fine one that is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better when performed by strangulation because strangulation quickly eliminates any cause for the testicles to desire coit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Care for the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a gap appears in the scrotum between the testicles, and within it there is a conch-like formation that resembles female genitals with hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And certain cases of a hernia in which urine collects in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special case: and it is that the conch of a woman on the pelvis is similar to two testicles of a man with only a small part protruding from the vaginal opening like male genitals and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is in three types: for one type of men and for one type of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to make an incision and drain the inflammation of that area until the condition improves, and then care for it with other treatments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of male ailment where urine is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitulo xxi. (in English: Chapter XXI)
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of prolonged and prominent flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Prolonged swelling due to natural causes is reduced and properly treated with the right regimen, but sometimes it becomes exacerbated in certain women so much that it spreads like in men and reaches the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you should remove the excess swelling with your hand or oil and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not continue incising, especially at the root of the lesion, to avoid bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that wound until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Flesh born is flesh that grows within the womb of a woman until it fills it up, and prolonged swelling is like this (and for this reason some people call it “caudated disease”); therefore we incise it as we would an abscess, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitolo LXXII. (in English: Chapter LXXII)
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is a condition where the cervix does not open or it is narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has occurred before, and it is caused either by swelling of the flesh not properly reduced or by cysts that are subtle or large.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused either in the root of the uterus or in its costae (or sides), or on the superficial pus or deep pus, and it forbids coitus, engagement, and conception, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of this condition is made by the midwife if the opening is visible, but if it is not, you must seek for it with fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the opening is due to a subtle cyst that is close to the two labiae, you must break it and separate it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	This means that you place your fingers between the two labiae, and indicate with both hands in which direction to proceed.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman lies on her back with her legs extended and you spread the two labiae apart with force until that subtle cyst is broken and the opening is opened up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Take wool, dip it in oil and place it over the area, and leave it for a day to ensure that the incision site does not become consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cyst is large and thick, you must incise it with a spatula or a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is due to fibrosis, you must suspend it with oil and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medications that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as henbane, dragon's blood, and poppy seeds, mixed with albumen of egg whites.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer a wide lead cannula to ensure that the wound does not heal easily.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and administer hot water poultices.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it be cured by other methods of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes the uterus expels other fleshy substances during childbirth, and it is necessary to incise them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is an abscess containing cancerous matter in the uterus, do not apply iron to it in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitolo LXXIII. (in English: Chapter LXXIII)
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail (prolapsed rectum) and red botch that may occur in the cervix of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized in the openings of large veins where blood continues to flow from them; and chronic hemorrhoids should be treated as thrombosed hemorrhoids (?).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already mentioned in the division the species of these [conditions] and their signs, and I will say thus those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And now I will tell you about those that are internal in the mother's womb and do not appear to the senses, therefore there should be no treatment done with iron for them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the mother's womb, where you can touch them, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman into warm water and apply mustard oil or linen cloth with sharp scissors or rough wool and cut them with the blade of the scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powder on them made from the blood of one of the incisive teeth with a mortar and pestle, such as arnica and similar [plants].
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and then place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of camomile, wormwood, milkwort, and yarrow, and similar [plants].
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take barley flour mixed with honey and wine, and make an ointment of it to be applied on the thighs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is separated, that is good; otherwise, make it adhere with two bandages, and to the breasts with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and dip it in the juice of coltsfoot or comfrey or goldenrod wine, and apply it to the place; and cure the place with a mouth rinse until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the tooth that needs to be extracted is sharp and hard to remove, you should cut it as indicated in the previous section.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal that place until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Chapter on the perforation of accidental hernia in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Types of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as cancer, tooth abscess, ulcers, boils, carbuncles, erysipelas, fistulas, anal fissures and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases, their types, and their signs, as well as their cures, in the previous section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And in this treatise I will talk about the cauterization of an abscess in the mother that is associated with a healthy abscess and if you want to know how to perform the operation on it with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with a blow and fever and swelling, and if it does not show signs of worsening, then do not perform perforation of it; instead, heal it with liquids that help in maturation until the symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must perform the incision on a woman lying on a table with two legs, and lower her back, place her feet at the edge of the table far from the abdomen, spread her thighs apart, and place her arms on either side of her neck, and each one should be bound to what is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And after the mother follow the right side and provide the instruments necessary to open the opening of the womb; the shape of which will come in those cases that are appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to use this instrument, you must position it at the opening of the womb on the woman, and nothing that comes out from the instrument into the womb should be more than the opening of the womb itself and the hand of the sick person.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place powder on the texture of the opening of the womb so that no instrument can enter into the opening of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must stop the flow of fluid that flows out from the instrument on top and the one who provides the instrument should turn it until it is inserted into the opening of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision is made and it is touched with the hand and moistened, then you must cauterize its head with a hot iron rod.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the discharge is evacuated, then you must apply a plaster immersed in rose oil or other ointment containing some herbs on the incision in the womb and hold the cloth over the opening of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then close the woman's belly with clean wool immersed in water boiled with herbs.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be treated for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some intervals are washed (the anus and the wound) with water and honey, and then with water in which is crushed a rational amount of licorice root or long-acting oil, and then returned to the enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the anus and swollen, then it is necessary for you to abstain from treatment with iron, having care from what has been said in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the afterbirth should be medicated when it is born abnormally according to its figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the beginning the figure of normal delivery by signs from it, and when you see the woman push at the birth and desire to smell the air, and it is scraped off by what is above her in delivery, and she quickly delivers the afterbirth, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and its appearance on its head, and the second one with or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the abdomen of it be compressed so that the afterbirth descends gently because if they descend on their head, the second one will descend with it, and it should be cleaned with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if the afterbirth is abnormal and unnatural because when it is born on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one hand (or foot), or the head of it and one hand (or foot) is born, or in the abdomen of it, and it is forcibly turned over its neck, and similar to the unnatural figures of it.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you the entire figure of it, and what method is in it for it to be understood and remain on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the effluxion (of afterbirth) is born on its head by natural expulsion, and it is violent towards the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes the strength of it has already weakened, then do the scissors, or what the women have, and evaporate the congealed blood from it with fenugreek oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife enters between her teeth a small spatula and cuts through the second one (afterbirth), or dries it with her nail up to where the moisture in it runs out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until it descends the afterbirth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman must be washed with the mucus of chicken and mucus of fenugreek with a razor.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command it to be compressed, washed, and made to vomit with a mixture of the following; then put your mouth on it and its nose for an hour because the afterbirth will quickly pass through.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two ends of the afterbirth are quickly forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them with gradual ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not enter, then the woman should rest on a chair and raise her legs, and the chair should be moved over the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall too hard.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the ends are not turned inside out and the afterbirth dies, then you incise them and extract the rotten part of the afterbirth or pull the body to the hand with cloth and extract it equally, because that will quickly pass through.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the appearance of the afterbirth on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the afterbirth is born on its feet, then it is necessary for you to press them upwards, and turn the afterbirth into a small ball, and hold it together, and take one foot of it and stretch it gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, command him to express himself and make him turn around with a condition, because it will be forgotten if God wishes.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not forgotten as we have recommended, then you return the little thing bit by bit inside that second figure naturally, because it will be forgotten with slight effort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If everything we have recommended is prohibited, then take alum and dissolved gum, and grind them well in a mortar with good percussion, and apply the paste to the woman's lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then mix that paste in tepid water until the hypogastric hernia is reached.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts around it are relaxed, then subject him to a fumigation of myrtle and make him rest in that position.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then make him vomit by mixing the paste on a tray and making him strain his mouth, removing it, and pressing gently on the lower part of the abdomen with slight compression, because the matter will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Immediately place his hands on top of his thighs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the matter comes out in this manner, then you insert your fingers little by little into his anus; and the woman should be leaning over his neck, with her legs hanging down, and they should be lying on a bed, and she should hold his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on the abdomen of him little by little and extract what is between his toes from the anus, until it is prepared in the rectum below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the matter is not forgotten, then take his feet and shake them vigorously, and press gently on the hypogastric hernia little by little towards the rectum above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your fingers and press gently on the matter little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the matter is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Immediately hold onto the matter longitudinally with one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce the hand of him, but if you cannot do so, then raise the woman and make her run.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot run, then make her lie down on the bed and hit the joints of him with vigorous percussion and promptly administer the remedies that I have recommended for lubricants.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the birth has begun, then make her vomit on a tray and study the reduction of the hand, and insert it according to its natural figure, and make her strain and command him to contract himself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Immediately place the matter on his neck, with the opening of him at his mother's chest.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure that the midwife holds the hand of him and gently rotate it little by little with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is rotated and rotated, then pause on the cervix of him with the oil and lubricants that we have recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command him to push little by little and when you have done so, make her vomit on a tray and command her to lean over the right side, and command him to contract himself; and make her strain with a condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared on the right side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother is having labor in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second membrane with your nail up to the point of being drained of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of him, incise the umbilical cord to ensure it does not remain and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And press the fetus gently into the rectum up to the point that it comes out and command the woman to contract herself, and it will be forgotten with slight ease if God wishes.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are usually born in labor, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unfortunate; however, it is due to nature, not human action.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And separate the second membrane, whether it is multiple or not, using scissors, and distinguish each fetus by cutting its umbilical cord. Sometimes they are forgotten as if they were a single birth due to natural ease, but sometimes they are born unacceptably as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If a difficult case arises for them, you must sedate them and eventually reach the point that was previously described in terms of abnormalities. At this point, you should treat them as we have advised.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	The subtle and smooth midwife does what is needed for ease, subtlety, and delay, and is clever according to every figure prepared by the art of healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	There are certain days that occur at the end of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and sometimes even more, and it is necessary to check that a woman has given birth after twenty-five or thirty weeks, which was caused by measurement of the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	All this indicates that the midwife should be aware that similar cases may appear and act accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI (76 in Roman numerals).
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting a dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When treating a dead fetus as mentioned in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled yet, you must determine if the woman is of good moral character and not subject to any accidents that are feared for her safety.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman should be positioned lying on her left side, and her head should be tilted downward, with her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold the woman's legs together or tie them to her left side, so that the body does not extend during the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with warm oil and honey, aloe vera, fennel seed, and herbs.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then lubricate the midwife's hands with those oils and emollients, insert her hand with ease into the woman, and position herself at the location where she will grip the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Choose the appropriate location: therefore you must consider if the fetus is prepared to be extracted from its head or another part. In such a case, grasp it by the heels, neck, mouth, palate, beard, shoulder blades, ribs, or hips, or near the loins.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	However, if the fetus is positioned feet-first, grab it by the heels or middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	The hand should grip the fetus with the fingers, maintaining the curvature at the point between the mentioned fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently to reach one of the locations mentioned earlier until the cause is achieved.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then stop and position another hand on the fetus, or a third if necessary, to ensure that it is pulled inwards rather than extended along its length.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	The pain should be eased everywhere, so that its intensity is reduced just as it is done in tooth extraction by removing it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Cover it with something soft, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary to have the midwife anoint some oil on her fingers and insert them skillfully into that area and turn what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the delivery is forgotten (mistakenly left incomplete), then the midwife's fingernails should be trimmed and inserted into the place that is deeper inside, doing this until everything is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is out of position and cannot be reduced by manipulation, then fabricate a bandage around it; and extract it slowly until everything is expelled, either at the joint of the hand or in the pelvis.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same to the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large or it occurs that the head is compressed in the birth canal, or the water sac of the fetus is not properly positioned, then insert between the two spine-like objects and split the head and extract the water, or cut it with an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will be described in the chapter that follows.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Do the same if the fetus naturally has a large head: and then insert a hook or catch it with an alundat as previously mentioned, and extract the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is out and compressed by the pelvis, then it should be cut open so that the moisture within the pelvis can drain.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications or excessive swelling of the cervix, you should insert the head as soon as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is protruding or there is edema in it, then you should perform a perforation to drain the moisture that is inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction and direction of it to the mouth of the mother should be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed in the abdomen and pelvis, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and pelvis so that moisture that is inside can drain.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other limbs remain and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, she should insert her hand into the perineum, seek the head with it, pull it towards the mouth of the mother, and insert one or two fingers, pulling it with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by an edema that occurs at the urethra, do not force it too much; instead, you should administer a moist, oily solution.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and continue to care for the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the fetus is on the patient's side, attempt to insert it as much as possible if feasible; and administer the solution previously mentioned for a live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	You must not leave any cause of the second one (infection).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your work, then administer the solution previously mentioned for the treatment of postpartum infections that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is bleeding, then stop it with styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman whose stomach contained a dead fetus, and on top of that fire, another observation was made, and the fetus was already dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	There has been an edema in the patient's belly for a long time; it has swollen so much that it is now producing pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him and have been treating him for a long time, but the wound has not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied strong adhesive plasters to him, and extracted an object that was believed to be a bone, but after several days another bone was extracted; I was astonished because there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought they might have been from the dead fetus's bones.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I cauterized the wound and extracted many small bones, the woman continued to live in this manner for a long time, but developed a small fracture in one arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not think it was strange because in such cases knowledge and skill with the hand are useful to treat this.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of a loop used to open the mother's cervix:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a clamp used to hold the forceps, with two prongs at the ends of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This virtue must be very subtle and made of strictor or from poppy seed or from the root of birch tree.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Let the length of each rod be two fingers and the width of both be one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods there should be two adjustments of that rod which are already firm, the length of which is equal to the width of one palm and slightly more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth to keep it open when you apply the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another substance similar to that, but slightly heavier:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it with rods of poppy seed or birch root as with forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, on the end of it (the rod), there should be two adjustments similar to this, and the length of those adjustments is equal to one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you want to open the mother, first lay the woman on a bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then insert your hand with the instrument similar to forceps as you would with tongs, according to the depth that you assess based on the size of the mother's mouth and the amount that the cervix dilates.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The ancient remedy that I will tell you about:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	A remedy to induce labor:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Remedy for the elimination of a large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	It is similar to forceps at the end, as sometimes, and some of the times it is made long like forceps according to this shape, as sometimes, at the end of which are inserted and crushed like teeth of a saw with which it is cut and broken.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Remedy for reducing excess fluid:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Remedy for pulling out a splinter:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Remedy for removing two splinters:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps having teeth of closure with the head of the tool being rounded:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of forceps having two prongs with the head being cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas flat:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more of that kind are multiplied and the species prepared, the craftsmen should make it as light in operation and as small in quantity as possible for men.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And the works of those instruments must be carried out, regardless of whether they are small or large, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is retained, the child must be commanded to hold its breath, and then you must make it sneeze with care, and place your hand over its mouth and nose, and if by doing so it has escaped, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then you take a potion and perforate the covering with a hole and place it over the mother's mouth so that the herbs penetrate the mouth calmly, roughly, aniseed, camomile, arabic gum, cassia bark, and sweet woodruff.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the potion, and it is placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a tube of cane in the mother's mouth, and let it remain until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make it sneeze as we have said, and the second tooth will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if the treatment persists and the second tooth does not come out, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sesame or in alum powder, and insert it into the cavity with care so that the second tooth is found, and when it has been found, take it out bit by bit but carefully so that the mother does not strain herself excessively.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It must be immobilized on the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of force, for it will obey and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and the potion of water with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself in attempting to extract it repeatedly, but rather let what comes out of her mouth lie in the female's cavity and anoint it with saliva and tetraformication; for it will become soft and dissolved in a few days and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it becomes soft, raise the bad humors to the head and stomach, and let the patient suffer from this; then it is necessary to administer sub-fumigation and suitable remedies.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But one of the ancients has already spoken about fumigation with garlic and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument for female fumigation to retain menstruation and the second tooth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Made of iron or clay.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end on the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let it remain until that fumigation is consumed and another is prepared.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for the unborn child's anus:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn children and unperforated anuses, which are soft and oily.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should perforate it with the tool mentioned above; if not, then perforate it with a sharp spatula and be careful not to touch the intestines.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place a wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and anoint it with saliva until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is oily, place a tube in the hole for several days and stop it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And occlusion of the anus occurs due to ulcers or abscesses; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation and treat it with what we have said about the cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistulas that run downwards.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that run downward in the lower part are nodular and swollen, which run towards the anus outside or in the space of one partition.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and runs with foul, white, or putrid discharge, some abscesses of this type may perforate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrations are recognized by what is exuded from them through discharge and wind; sometimes the patient experiences discharge, and the worm is often strong in those cases.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Sometimes those fistulas can be observed penetrating into the bladder space and into the meat of the penis, and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the navel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Fistula penetrating into the anus but not outside is known as when you insert your finger in the anus and try to find the fistula with a subtle probe or iron, if it is not treacherous.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is treachery in that, then insert a probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel it at all or you do not find any cause for discharge, worms, or wind as mentioned above, then you should know that it is not penetrating and you can proceed with treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the penis meat, its meaning is evidently that it is of urine and it is forbidden to use that place with medicine until the area has been consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or bone and pain is encountered in the area, this signifies that if the probe can enter the bone without treachery, pain will be felt in the surrounding area; that pus forms quickly; and that no medication works there, nor does it heal with salve.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for them all, and the cure of these is the labor and futility of foolish doctors over which they are obsessed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	It is that the patient lies between your hands over his chest and raises his legs upwards, so that the thighs are inclined towards his stomach, and then insert a probe of lead or iron (if the fistula is not treacherous) to find its location.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If the patient feels pain around the neck, then you should insert your finger in his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the probe penetrating by itself, or if you feel it between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; therefore do not work on it, for there is no healing in it as mentioned above.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some still say that it heals in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	The medicine that is hoped to help in this case is that you ignite a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then you rotate it two or three times until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula, similar to goose feathers, have been tightened.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Wrap it with bandages until all the tissues that have been tightened can be seen, and treat it with a medication to nourish and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, that is good; otherwise, it is not cured in a certain amount of time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe is inside and does not penetrate your finger in the anus, but there is a tissue or flesh covered by it, and sometimes the fistula appears to be covered by the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula and you will see that the skin dries with the probe, and continue until the incision reaches the location where the end of the probe emerges, and through the probe it is freed and caught.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Wash those fistulous tissues which are similar to goose feathers and remain without any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow sometimes comes out between you and your action when incising those tissues, then the remedy is to apply milk or a mild instrument for cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, as cauterization with fire provides good healing: it consolidates those tightened tissues and abscesses the excess bleeding of fluids.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Wrap it with bandages or splints until the place heals, and treat the wound with hard salve to nourish and consolidate it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	These are medications with astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it has been healed and there will be no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has penetrated the rectum of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if the probe and you are close to flesh or tissue, and it is almost penetrating, then there is no operation in that place but rather by trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as mentioned before; or make an incision until you achieve the cavity so that it becomes possible for you to enter and treat it directly; do not proceed with incision for fear of piercing the rectum and causing harm directly to the patient, and instead treat it with what has been said as it is a strong healer; or elongate the membrane or remove the pus that is incised near the anus, as mentioned before, or with the probe or another sharp instrument, and then clean those fistulous tissues which are in the incision, and finally force yourself to heal the entire wound by continuing to incise it, and if the abscess pus does not consolidate above the anus, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be more easily irritated by the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And at some times the fistula is closed according to this method: it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and at the edge of the anus around the body's surface with a cord, and at the margin of the anus, then take a probe of perforating extremity, which is thus like a needle for preparing wounds in this manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert a probe into it, surrounded by five threads or around the threads; then insert the probe into the fistula until it achieves its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if you penetrate the edge of the anus deeply, then you draw out the thread from that hole as you insert your finger into the anus; extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends, tighten each one, let it be for a day or two, and when the thread sinks more into the flesh, tighten it further until those flesh parts which are between the two ends of the thread and fall into place.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then care for the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, make them penetrate, using any method you prefer, but do not cause pain, because it is not your job to do this so that they do not become inflamed; then let it heal until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way to use a spined spatula for closing the fistula: its curved part is sharp and the other part is not, so that it does not penetrate unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitching of hemorrhoids where blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either like coal near the anus, or as if they were filled with grease from radishes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small and large, and blood flows from them constantly, and they are one kind, and they are multiple, and they extend outside the anus, and at their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that extend outside the anus are in months with little moisture, which discharge clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and their color is according to the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to expel until the anus becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and suspend them with scissors or what you have available, using your nail, and then cauterize the roots of those.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if scissors are not available for those due to their moisture and softening of those, then take them with rough cloth or leather or woolen cloth, extract those with your fingers, and then cauterize those and sprinkle some caustic powders near the incision on them, so that they are in place of cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And care for those with other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not open, you crush the patient with a crutch with slight biting, and wash it with the water that is in the anus and causes the anus to open slightly when the patient squeezes it gently.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause of them is light, and you grasp those with your nail, or you grasp those with scissors, penetrate those, and then care for them with the water that has been mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who have incisions, you should provide suturing of them according to this method: take a probe wrapped in thread and insert it with a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper part, and make the probe penetrate into the side of the other part with the needle, and wrap the two ends of the probe longitudinally around the part below the needle, and tie the hemorrhoid strongly, and knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus and let it rest there, and let it rest on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that one inside until it heals; and when it is healed, care for those with enemas or other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Occasionally, occurrences happen due to the drying up of a wound or due to natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and of little value in that medicine, you should then cauterize those with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become wet and are stopped from healing upwards, which prevents them from consolidating; and care for those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you dry those with a very strong reason before the first blood flows and they are scorched; and care for those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of almsir (abscess), is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that the pulse, which is crucial, should not be felt incorrectly, as it may not appear as a round one according to the color of the body similar to a clavicle head, and it is felt throughout the body but more so in the areas below the feet and the hands, and for these pains, it must be sought out.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And therefore, it is necessary to cut what is in the circle of the nail and keep it with forceps or oil, and remove it from its root; then heal that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the following which is mentioned in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Moreover, a wart is a small rough, round fistula on the surface of the body, and it often appears in children's fingers.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment is to stretch and incise it, or compress it with a hot iron or a wool thread that can be bound around it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that as mentioned earlier, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	All verrucas, whether inverted or not, have been removed using the appropriate tool as I will explain later.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Moreover, a scab is a small or large rough fistula on the surface of the body that moves on the skin and when touched it turns into a pustule similar to an ant bite, and it grows around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment is to use a lancet or a needle with a sharp tip, and press it over the pus-filled blister to contain its circle around the area; then rotate your hand with the lancet inside to incise what is in the circle of the scab, and press it on the skin, and remove the scab from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do that with an iron or steel needle in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The portion above the needle should be drawn out gently, blunt (not pierced), wrapped in such a way that upon pressing it, the pain of that area is alleviated and its rotation is reduced.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the scab as mentioned earlier in the cauterization of athlete's foot, do so following the instructions given there.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Concerning the instruments that are administered for healing purposes.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the instrument is made of silver or lead or iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of small and large instruments according to their purpose, for the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and those with rough or painful tails, the craters of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and shallow crater:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above, where the pouch is attached, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a distinction where the pouch is attached in such a way as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the pus below, which is inserted into the tail, should be blunt (not pierced) and thin, extending to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and a large pus a small hole.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated in such a way that it can be rolled up; and if the space between the holes is too large, make it smaller with your finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert yourself into those true strong cuts, fierce and cruel of the same kind, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is stopped there, tighten the head of the plaster between two distinguishable points with strong compression, and cauterize that wound: But the quality of cauterizing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and ensure that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The patient should be positioned on their back, and raise their legs upwards and place a cushion or a blanket under them; then oil, lard, alum of hog or juice of fennel or similar substances are applied to the wound opening, and it is inserted gently into the anus with ease, and the attendant should take the bag and press it firmly and repeatedly until everything in the cautery is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and the patient lowers their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine is not sufficient for that purpose, take more of it; and if it persists in the wound for an entire night, it is less beneficial.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize it in the cases of belly solutions and evacuation of the wound, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine and thin cautery, with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On treatments for sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of treatments for sores what is appropriate for a free person, and I say the treatment of those with more and with medicines according to their completeness.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the various causes by which sores are often formed are such as falling stones, or incisions of a sword or dagger, or striking with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to these.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the sores that are in the parts of the body are such as a sore that falls on the head, neck, foot, stomach, or buttocks, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment for some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple sores of the head, as the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by falling stones or something similar, and the wound has already been stitched with the chain but is large and you fear the patient will develop an abscess, then immediately lance the cephalic vein and do not delay; and remove the pus from it according to the strength of the blood if there is no other reason prohibiting lancing, especially if the blood that has come out of the sore is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the lancing should be on the opposite side of the affected part; and ensure that the patient does not eat or drink, or thick food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for the lancing to be prohibited, then it should be reduced by food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Stop the sore if an abscess develops on it, and apply a hot oil or wine in which is steeped an herb that stops inflammation to it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of the abscess, stop the sore, if it is fresh with its blood and air has not yet changed the powder that I recommend should be applied carefully.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, stop the wound with some soothing agents until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or from an incision of a sword or similar, and the lips are not properly closed, then close it with suture as I recommend for their closure.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore is open to the bone and there is only a small suspension and no retention of it, then make an incision on it and treat the sore with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are coarse: meats and broths similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the skin turns rotten and does not adhere to the bone, then make an incision all around it and cut everything out, and treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow out and has not been separated by medicines, then ask about the artery, and if it is not separated, make a puncture on it with a spatula or lance it; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said does not conform, then cauterize it until the blood is separated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, the cause is minor; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them as it hardens before the air changes it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: mix one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood (dragon's blood sap), three parts of non-extinguished charcoal; all must be well ground and sieved, fill the wound with it, tightly bind it with good binding until it adheres, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tightly bind it above with the powder and release it, but do not loosen it until it is healed, for the medicine has not been absorbed into it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Sometimes just make cautery (burn), when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood sap at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	This method of treatment is done for large wounds that require binding and tightening when necessary, and for new wounds with their own blood, where the air has not yet affected them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has altered it, and especially in summertime, then do not intend to place this powder, but rather treat them with what was mentioned before, so that you bind them with appropriate dressings or that you bind them with oat flour paste mixed with water and honey until they become granulated; and apply the other treatment to them until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a bone fracture in the wound, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you will say the treatment for skull fractures that are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	For wounds on the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple skull wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve or artery in the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, do not hesitate to cure it with what causes violent coagulation, such as zinjabar and zegi that is like them because they harm nerves and constrict it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the root of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if there is something that is cured with light medicines such as being washed with soft water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and therefore when it is washed with soft water and the other remedies are minimized according to this method, and keep it moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, administer suture or sew the lips of it, and apply powder to it until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is depth in the wound or it is located in the lower part of the flesh, you perforate it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spondylus of the gulayro (vertebra) has been cut or saved, and the veins in the neck are protected, then you adjust the lips of the coccyx with suture on the axis of the gulayro and do not touch it; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with appropriate structure, and let it rest for several days; and apply gentleness with stimulation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already penetrated the bone in danger, then you percuss it, and if there is fragment of bone, extract all that you can; and what remains unattended, let it heal on its own until the wound becomes granulated, and separate it and relieve the pain.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is new, sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a fistula in the wound, treat it with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For wounds on the neck or similar, if it is stabbed between the shoulders with a sword, knife, spear or something else.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a stab wound by a lance or sword, and sometimes of great depth, then consider whether the wound has a foul odor when the patient complains of it; know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not much depth and the wound is new with its own blood, then you wait until the first hour to apply powder, and do not press it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and harms the patient, but apply attractive moisture and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the moisture is not available, you wait for the wound to heal over with old scab so that it draws out what comes from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in contact runs out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm, tremor of the heart, palpitations or other good conditions, then you know that the wound is healed; and at this point cure it with heat and the other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is doubtful and it is always discharging, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a stab or sword, and it is shallow on the surface of the foot or back, then care for it with what comes first - stitching, if large, or powder, if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already caused harm to the bone, and if those sharp objects have pierced it, then you twist the wound and apply pressure to draw out those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then you press the wound shut that it may heal more easily, as the removal of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds occurring on other parts of the body, the remedy in treatment is the remedy that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the stomach is either great, small or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great hernia or the nerve of the hernia in some cases, it is necessary to make an incision and the stitching of them be made forcefully and finely.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small rupture is difficult to repair by other means, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care to push them back into their place as soon as possible, for it swells up and becomes enlarged, making re-insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best hernia is a moderate one, as in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two types mentioned previously.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Know that the stitching of the stomach is according to four methods, but two of these are common and necessary in the stitching of other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	The other two methods are specific to other types of wounds, but they are particularly applicable in the stitching of the stomach.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you expose and declare [the procedure] to everyone.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus say that if the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the small rupture as mentioned before, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat the affected area by submerging a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or by soaking it in warm water, and adding cyperus, spike, and bindings to push the inflamed intestine back into place until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	In some cases, this can be seen where there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, when you see inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallow are mixed, as this helps to relieve the pain caused by it.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine has not been pushed back into place with this treatment, then you make a small incision in the rupture using a sharp instrument to drain pus-filled abscesses.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first sentence in English is: "The initial cure is better when it is not a section, and there should be no attempt to section unless strictly necessary and unavoidable."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"Of the instrument, choose its shape according to [the condition]:"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"One part should be angular and sharp, the other not-sharp, and the end should be subtle but not too subtle like a spatula, but rather slightly rounded."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And since the abscess is enlarged and out of its place (hernia), it is necessary that its reduction should be in its natural form, in its proper place, if possible directly over it, because this is best."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, with their legs bent as much as their head; and if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and bend their legs downwards."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should always focus your intention and consideration on which side the abscess is closer to."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And similarly, it is necessary that you treat both large abscesses and smaller ones."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"In small abscesses, place what you have prepared there, and make sure the one who administers it is among your most trusted, who will hold the rupture with his hand and adjust the edges of it, and carefully expose the abscess that may cause any obstruction to the suture."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common method of suture: take a needle or counting needle according to the size of the abscess; and hold the needle from the edge of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, without putting too much force in both ends of the thread, with both ends of the knot outside the edges of the incision until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added both ends of the thread and both ends of the knot, making four rows."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And tighten with double force around the needle, and some watchful looks on both sides, and carefully bring together the edges and the abscess by stitching; and release the pressure of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completed the entire contraction of the abscess with the needles."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And the needles should be of a medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the knot, and therefore it is necessary that they should be of a medium thickness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary that the needle should be inserted at both ends of the incision immediately, because this may cause the flesh to be easily penetrated and the abscess to break before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not prolong the stitching so that the abscess is prevented from consolidating."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And carefully penetrate the ends of the needles so as not to cause pain to the patient while they sleep, and pause over the suture with expanded pulp of all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the abscess has consolidated."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And these types of stitching with needles in this way are more suitable for small abscesses, because they require only one needle or two or around them."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer with the suture the four ends, of the incision and two ends of the knot, in one look, with a needle that should be tightly wrapped around its entire length."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, withdraw the needle from that part where you started, to draw back all the pus from the upper part of the abscess towards the lower part, so that the stitching may be like sewing fabric where the fabrics are tightened."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"This stitching is known by men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this stitching I healed a wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was covered with a coat of mail and was the rupture of a large abscess measuring one palm and protruding from two palms from the hernia of the lower part and the rupture was in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced it after the hernia had been out for 24 hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the abscess consolidated in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured him and he recovered; and he lived for many years and continued in his normal activities."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; but by a miracle, because I did not cure him with the mouth (medication), because there was no place for it in his condition or any medicine, but instead I pressed on the abscess with a piece of old cloth two times a day and washed it constantly with honey water until he recovered."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Two kinds of stitching are said to be proper, according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with sewing from the outside to the inside with the needle passing from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters the suture and passes through it and all along the body, leaving the tip of the thread at the point where you inserted the needle; then the needle is passed from the inner part to the outer part in the other end of the suture on the other side of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when that has been passed through, you pass it again through the same opening from the outer to the inner side of the wound; and leave the tip of the thread at the point where this occurred, and pass the needle from the inner part to the outer part on the other side of the suture.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And pass through it with your penetration, which you passed through the wound at the point that you saw in the inner part of the incision where everything will pass through.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And begin with this passage on the side that is toward the point where you saw the suture, and pull out the needle from the suture that penetrated, and return it to the suture and bring the end of the suture to the opposite side of the wound, and pull out the other part of the suture from the suture.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this again and again, and continue to sew all that is outside following the same example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the entire method of this stitching is that you sew with skin sutures, which sews the skin, as you sew the wound once from the tip of the suture, and leave the other side until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	However, the second kind of proper stitching, which is called Gallic, and this is known from it and recommended for use, is that you sew according to a semilunar shape as some physicians sew in such a way, joining all the parts to their corresponding part by nature; and they apply the end of one to the other end and the point of the wound to the other end, and this is done as I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You must insert the needle at the point of the wound on your side of the incision, and make it pass through to the inner part only, leaving two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it pass from outside to inside in two ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn each one, and make each one pass from the inner part to the outer part in two opposite ends of the wound.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that I previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the Gallic method.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	However, some say that the abdominal stitching is corrected with two needles, so you insert each one a thread and start with the entry of the needle on your side, and make it pass through to the other side as those who sew the heart do.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	However, the treatment of pustule is considered a treatment for other pustules.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you obtain the pustule before its own blood appears and the air changes it, reduce the intestine and sew it up properly, then stop on the powdered dressing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the pustule, stop on those healing agents that are present among you until they become hard and the threads are pulled, and let it heal properly; and care for it in this way as with other pustules until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	However, if you are not present with the medicines, stop on it immediately, because it begins to weep pus, ointment, and change it every two days as you have taught me, until it is healed, because you do not need other medication for simple pustules in most cases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	However, if you fear that the pustule may communicate to major injuries, it is necessary that you immerse lamb's wool in steeped oil of quality or roasted oil, and stop it on the circuit of the areas that are between the joints and leave it as I have told you.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction occurs in your hernias, because it often swells up, you should cauterize that with black-stained white vinegar, and especially if the purulence is present in the hernia and is made to exit through the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the large hernia heals more easily with pus than the small hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the hernia that is called "gigunu" does not receive healing from pus that occurs there; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, the size of it that is in them, and the delicacy of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the wound is from a cut, obtain fresh linen and reduce it in accordance with your rule as you would reduce hernias.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been left open and has turned black or white, then you should tightly bind it over the area that is corrupted by it, so that blood flow may come out, since in linen are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert another linen piece and place the ends of the bandage hanging from the wound side on either side of the wound opening, so that the attraction to it is alleviated. By cutting the linen and releasing the pressure of the wound, blood flow may be encouraged.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the wounds when they occur in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small disruption in the hernia, it may be possible to restore it in some men, so that the following is known: I have seen one who was plagued in his abdomen with a piercing lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and from this treatment and persistence, healing occurred.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, the cure continued because it was not yet complete in healing, but rather focused on cauterizing the area that was still infected and heating the site to consolidate it.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the area consolidated, I warned the patient about the danger of another accident in his abdomen; and no one should endanger himself by that accident and disrupt his usual diet and hydration, and approach a bath and exercise in his bed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people said that when a wound occurs in the hernia, and it is small, it is necessary to tie it in this way: take large breadcrumbs; align the edges of the wound and place one of them on the open side over the edges of the wound; so when you grab them and tighten their mouth, cut off the tip, since it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another breadcrumb next to the first one, and do not stop making breadcrumbs one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce the breadcrumbs and suture the wound; and leave the tips attached in the hernia until the hernia is healed, and no harm befalls the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia can be tied with a thin string made from an animal's intestine, as it is more delicate; and you take the end of this fine string from the intestine, which is already disinfected, and tie the end of it with a linen thread, enveloping it, and insert the needle through it into the hernia, stitching it with that thread and reducing the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with breadcrumbs is not a guarantee or hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not advisable to operate, but rather cauterize, and healing will not be complete.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment for fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and decayed, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and exudes pus continuously without being drained, in any part of the body, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula in truth is a hardened node, white and painless with a cavity similar to that of an ulcer, and it is called a swollen abscess or "rizzo".
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men, it may be moist, exuding pus; and the moisture is usually drained in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture becomes thicker and coarser, and sometimes it is more delicate.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, when discussing wounds, that every ulcer that does not heal or is not in raw flesh, it is not due to any of these causes: one of which is a lack of pus in the body; or because of malice of it; or because between it and the edges there is hardened flesh preventing the growth of flesh; or because it is thick and coarse; or because the ulcer itself contains pus and the matter that is transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not appropriate for its treatment; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a plague; or because of the property of the region, such as in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because in it there is one bone or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, the signs of them and the treatment with medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by surgery with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; those being fistulas that reach veins, arteries, nerves, spinal cord, hernia, bladder, ribs, spine, or joints composed by complexion such as hand and foot; and these are the ones that cause proximity to the main part and similar things.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus, the fistula of this kind, following this method, belongs to difficult-to-heal illnesses that do not accept cure and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If the depth of the fistula does not reach these places as mentioned and you hope for its healing, and wish to find out about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the correct path, look for it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, as lead has the ability to be lightened and curved along the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula is covered in horrible movement, it is not possible for you to investigate it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, close the horrible openings by using a probe on them, as the moisture used to close that one will go to other openings and run out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then examine it with great care, to determine if you have bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is a fistula that has many horrible openings and is situated entirely on the surface of the patient, and the discovery of pain must be due to your compression on the area, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have examined all of these causes with certainty, then go to healing with confidence: it is that you consider whether the fistula is superficial, near salt, distant from a joint, or near nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You then dry out the fistula as previously mentioned in the description of it, and remove whatever is in that drainage and rotten flesh, and whatever has been born in the sores of the skin or similar, and heal it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is deep and follows the correct path, then you must incise it as far down as possible for you, and clean out all of its rotten flesh; and apply hot poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have filled with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the hot poultice has destroyed all of the rotten material in the cavity of the fistula due to its corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with healthy tissue until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, you then cauterize it as previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, then investigate it and dry it out as previously recommended, unless there is any cause of a vein or nerve or major limb as previously mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackening in it, you then remove it until the corruption is completely destroyed; and heal it with what nourishes it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it does not heal and discharges pus as previously described, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then examine it again more carefully and make the reason for it clear and the cleaning of it with the last strength you can muster, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it heals, that is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in this case, there is no hope but to leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the rotten bone is small, or can be removed by force, then remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there is movement of bones, then examine it carefully and remove all of them, ensuring that there are no causes with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there is any obstacle due to the wetness, and in incision there is no fear or error, you must incise those ligaments or flesh if it is necessary, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, you must wait for the wound to heal before attempting to operate on it again, and leave it with flesh and ligaments around the bones, ensuring that the wound is not consolidated, and contracting the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are afraid, wait for the wound to be covered with a dressing soaked in oil, or a wound covered with an Egyptian paste, or one of the green poultices, as when they heat up, the ligaments will soften and the bones will be separated from their adhesions, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the hip bone or thigh bone or resembling these, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then scrape that with resin only to the point where the blackness and corruption remains, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw off that part entirely and cut into the place where the corruption has been reached, and then heal it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that before operating on a man, you anesthetize and support him in the same way and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A healthy young man of about thirty years old who has pain in his lower back and the affected part inside his body is towards the internal matter of his body up to where the matter reaches his lower back, and it is a matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore, the time was prolonged due to the error of the doctors until the abscess had healed, and a wound was made in the matter, and his healing was postponed until the abscess had become fistulated, and they put in the wound materials that were motes, and the foulness and humidity of the body came out through these.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so a large number of doctors attended him for about two years, and they were not wise but skilled in their craft until I was summoned.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the abscess and the matter flowing from these wounds, and the body of that man was now completely stabilized and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of these wounds and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I cleaned and probed all the wounds, and found that they were connected to all parts of the abscess.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut into one of the wounds to the point where I discovered a bone fragment, and found it rotten, soft, and decayed; and a part of the abscess was already corrupted to the point that it had penetrated into the intestines.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And I cut out what I had discovered and prepared of the bone fragment.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I recognized that it was not a fracture in the bone but the corruption that had caused an abscess and been cut out, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I restored the wound with a strengthening medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I explored and discovered again on the bone secondly following the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to be of that corruption, and then I performed surgery and restoration on it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I continued to explore and cut the bone bit by bit, and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm's width, and that extracted with the marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No further exploration or incision in the operation and section of the limb was necessary except for the positioning of the leg and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because at all times due to excessive bleeding and malicious fainting it happened.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, it healed completely and nothing remained in the place of the bone, and the positioning of the limb was good within its body and restored the vitality of the limb; and it was maintained in its position and not caused any harm to it in walking or discomfort in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays if there is a fractured bone protruding from the body, then you must cut it off in this manner: namely, you should hold and tighten the protruding bone at its end, and have someone extend it; and place the linen bandage thicker than the first one on it; and place that over the surrounding flesh, and stretch the area to pull the skin away from the sides, and you will discover the skin over the location where you want to cut so that the cut does not injure the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or table below the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut with the knife so as not to cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the cutting be done on the rotten part little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and not apparent to the touch, then the second exploration may be necessary.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, then one continuous division runs along the other, and the corruption is at one or several locations in the bone, then you discover all the skin from all parts; and place a board below it, and cut that division where the corruption is until the second cutting continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the cutting should be small at the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupt joint, and then saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then that is not rational but a ruse.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and excise that, clean that as possible according to your ability, and with any instrument be corrected if not contrary to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You must know what saws and chisels are used to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and their coarseness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operation tools suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You must know that this operation signifies to you the type of instrument required; when you are knowledgeable and experienced in this art, and have seen many ways of treating illnesses, then you will already know what is suitable for each tool for all types of illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will be forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will need, as well as those with which you will proceed according to your discretion, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be shaped like the heads of pegs.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are brought together when they are corrupted or have a wide opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of larger knives (than others):
Forma de razori menor:	Small knife form:
Forma de razori lat:	Small blade shape:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Another blade shape should be made: a bow-like one with the length of the blade slightly higher and the sharpness of the edge from iron, and the handle of the knife should be made properly.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the knife with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another blade shape, subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another blade with curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small scissor-like knife (resembling tweezers):
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of the bone-cutting pliers:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of smaller pliers for cutting bones:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another type of pliers (similar to a ray), its end is like a saw and used in many places during bone surgery.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a ray that is suitable for drilling bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly shaped to all the causes mentioned for knives, pliers, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For drilling holes and cutting bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The drilling holes can be performed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated the corruption for its cure and it does not improve, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, in such cases it is necessary to drill the affected limb into the corruption to allow the patient to escape by that route either death or a more serious complication of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that case is when the limb becomes black before it has been cauterized, or if pus spreads into the limb and burns it completely, taking over the entire body; therefore, take care to drill that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous impacts such as those of the sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is on the finger tip, then you should drill the finger and not give space to the corruption for it to enter into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you reach the arm, drill the hole at the joint of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption until it enters into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if the corruption spreads to the arm, then you should drill the hole in the shoulder joint of the arm.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes through the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then in that case the death of the patient is inevitable; providing another treatment in such a situation is an excess of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption spreads to the foot and affects the toes, then you should drill the hole into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it penetrates into the sole of the foot, drill the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates to the heel, then you should drill the cavity into the ankle joint of the foot.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the corruption has already reached the heel, there is nothing to do but dismissal and allowing the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of drilling or sawing the limb is to tighten one ligament on the side of the part you want to drill, and tighten another ligament on the opposite side; then extend one ligament on the side you want to cut and extend another ligament on the other side; and separate the flesh between the two ligaments using a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or saw it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And you must stop all the ligaments at all the parts so as not to touch the affected area, and bring the dressing to the patient with suitable injury and sterile dressing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs during surgery, you should cauterize the site carefully or place some hemostatic powders to stop the blood; and then return to your treatment when it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cover the affected limb with an appropriate dressing and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend to you what is appropriate for a man in his foot, this event occurs that I also advise, which is when blackening of the skin on the foot occurs due to burns resembling fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	This corruption first appears in the affected toe and then affects the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, prepare this man by giving him more painkillers and anti-inflammatory drugs as the healing process approaches the affected limb with the intensity of pain and burns increasing, and drill the hole in the joint, and heal it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Over a long period of time, this persistent corruption appears in the finger tip (of the hand) indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I am pierced to expel that surplus with water that should rest on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and the surplus is not returned and begins to go into the other said inside before it starts in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to incise (make an incision) on his hand, but I did not want to do so fearing the return of that surplus, and instead I feared the incision of his hand might be fatal because the patient's vitality was weak.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he fainted from me (the doctor), he returned to his land and I was informed that the man prepared and incised his entire hand, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this narrative has not been added except as an aid for what is known about this disease, and as a signification by which it may be understood and acted upon accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of sinuses and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged before collection of pus, it should be broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from there, leaving a hollow cavity resembling a vessel, and the dressing that is placed over it should be thin and not lead to further corruption, nor press on bones or nerves or ligaments. This is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged before corruption sets in any member, it is called a fistula and not used.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of this is to incise the entire dressing in the same manner as it is rolled up, especially when it is made thin and treated like cloth, and make sure it does not adhere to the area due to corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the dressing will adhere and that corruption has not been achieved through subsequent consequences, and if the dressing contains pus on its surface, then you treat it with cleansing.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if it is considered to be a sinus and it is large, and the stench from the arm is strong, then you should cleanse it with an Egyptian remedy that consists of oil, vinegar, and zenna root powder, which are mixed together in a vessel and cooked until they become a pure liquid.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then you take the necessary amount from it (the Egyptian remedy), dissolve it in water and honey; then cleanse the sinus with this liquid, and tighten its opening, and leave the medicine there for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then remove this with care, and continue doing so for several days until the sinus is purified and the smell is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and in such a case, you should take the ashes of vinegar and put them in water, then boil that solution and use it to cleanse the sinus until you are confident that the sinus has been drained.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian remedy or water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with zenna root powder, or with vinegar and honey, because honey has properties to purify and clean, while vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess stiffness and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and are confident that the sinus has been drained, then cleanse it with a solution that makes the flesh grow there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take defyfinicon oil and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar, or cleanse it with various remedies and ointments that have properties already mentioned in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifices of the sinus are narrow and cannot accommodate the canula of the clyster, you should gradually widen it with a small iron, pausing at each point where it is wrapped in Egyptian wool or Basilicon gauze until it is fully widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifices are wide, you should add the lips to it with stitching and leave the quantity within the clyster unchanged.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices of the elbow joint are raised above the parting lines, then you should dry it in the affected area so that the arm can run into it below, because when the arm is bent at the angle of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the sinus into the bone as you desire, then pierce the member to prepare it for the procedure by which the arm will pass easily through it according to how it suits you and that there is no obstacle preventing the arm from passing.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take medicinal plasters and place them on the sinus according to what suits your intention of extending those over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of sufficient size to cover the entire sinus; and then, using scissors, make an incision in the straight part of the sinus orifice that is slightly wider than the orifice itself; and then, extend it over another piece of lion wool according to the width of the incision, and place it on top of that at a distance from the sinus orifice to relieve the pain of the arm and not allow the cloth to be too large, but rather cover it slightly for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	However, the one that is over the sinus orifice should always be kept wet to prevent anything from sticking to the arm there.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what is passing from the arm is more or less, or digested, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And in this way you observe the location of the sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter excreted over the sinus orifice has adhered, or adhesion has occurred, then you should detach it or on the third day, when you detach the wound, you change the cloth and renew the dressing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if from the sinus there is a subtle discharge of fluid, do not despair of adhesion, because healing occurs there, for some men in whom slow generation of flesh in wounds occurs, and of those it is made contrary.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the arm is undigested for more than several days from the sinus, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its cause is prolonged, then you dry the medications, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become as dry as diaphonous ointments when excess addition of zizy is applied.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The next remedy that cures is to take diaphonous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and have an old remedy in its substance, and mix it with that and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is similar in this action when there is no arm, diaphonous ointment, honey until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind everything into a powder over the honey that is on the fire, and apply that to the sinus with a linen, and strengthen it with the honey that you have heated until it thickens, and grind it again into a powder and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some days are administered with long aristology and the essence of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and the flour of iris and centaury, and use them as simple or compound remedies, grind those and sift and powder over the recommended honey; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its depth, and you begin an investigation into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistulous treatment as previously described.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of panaric and fingernail removal, incision, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaric is an abscess that comes from the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it grows strong in other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is valuable or it becomes an abscessed panaric or corrupted, and it gushes arm into the root of the nail, and it completely corrupts that one, and it carries its corruption to the bone into a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is destroyed, and the color of it is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have what has been said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with an iron all the excess that has accumulated from the nail and apply cauterization to the wound near it, because cauterization is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail press the flesh at the sides inside, and it begins to penetrate there, then you should stop the subcutaneous pus at the angle of the nail that penetrates the flesh, and force it up and incise the flesh easily, and pause over what remains of the flesh with corrosive medicines until everything is drained; and apply it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already spread in the bone, it is necessary that you drill the bone and extract it, for no time will heal if the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the decay and corruption spreads to the bone, it is necessary that you drill it as soon as its location is remembered, and apply care to that area so that it may heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the finger or toe is subjected to percussion or traction, and pain is intense, it is necessary that you first anesthetize the patient, then cut the nail sharply with a transverse incision across from top to bottom, but not to penetrate into the flesh beyond the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the patient and it may cause excessive growth of the surrounding skin at the location; and apply care to that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	That which is said to be "adjusted", that is born in the hands of many men, it is strong in flesh and bone, or it is strong in nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And these are born at the joint or they are the growth of nails from those [joints].
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	That which is born in the nails of the finger is not harmful, but that which is born at the joints is harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And from those which are fleshy, the section will be easy and you should drill its root with a large drill.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But from that which is born at the joint's roots, healing is difficult, so take care not to open it up (i.e., do not perform an incision).
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In that which is born in the finger, it is necessary that you drill the flesh of it at first with a round drill into the bone, then use a suitable saw, and apply care to that area so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation which occurs in the fingers between its motes (i.e., joints) or due to human birth defect, or due to consolidation of wounds or burns, or for similar reasons, it is necessary that you remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Place a pad of fine oil-soaked cloth between their (joints) to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate them or place a thin layer of lead between them until they are consolidated as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, you should remove that consolidation as it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of drilling defects, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Defects (i.e., vices) are varicose veins, and are large twisted veins full of melancholic bile that occur in the members of the body, and their major manifestation is in the legs, especially in those who travel, work or carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body of black bile several times with strong emesis, and draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of their (varicose veins) with iron is done in two ways: one is that it is drilled and the black blood is drawn out, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it (varicose vein) is done in this way: first, the leg is wrapped with warm water up to when the thick blood is resolved, which is a dark substance from the vein, and then the patient's leg is strapped above the knee to the most prominent part of the calf down to the ankle with a bandage, and then the vein is cut in one or two or three places, but make a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the iron rod from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and what you want to remove has been removed, and this will relieve the pain of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And tie it up (the bandage), and order him to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by anesthetizing (the patient) when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them (varicose veins) is done in this way: you should shave the patient's leg if it has sores and then immerse the leg in warm water and wrap it with hot water up to when it becomes swollen and the veins become prominent; or exercise it forcefully, if bathing is not available, until the member becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord along the vein in a long or short section depending on whether it is on the right side of the vein (i.e., medial or lateral), or at the bottom of it you should use the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the cord with scissors and peel off the vein from all sides until it is felt, and it should be noticed that it becomes darker and more painful.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, when you notice the white cord that is the vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place a roll of linen beneath it (the vein) until it is raised and detached from the cord, and suspend it with iron wire.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section on the same side for three fingers' width, and peel off the cord above the vein up to where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift and incise that [area] in the rear section, you must cut the heel, then extract that and raise it to the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then extract that from the section above it (the highest or most superior one) until it is completely outside; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If it does not bulge out, insert a strong double-pointed needle and tie it off, then extract it, or pierce it with the lance and turn your hand all around until it is pierced through.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to raise the hernia and may cause harm to the patient because of that.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Once that is completely removed, place your hand on the location of the wound, which has been soaked in wool dipped in vinegar and both roasted and unroasted oil, and cure it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the wound is contracted and has tortuosity with an enclosure at the partitions, and it is not according to what has been said, then you must cut along the entire length of the tortuosity and at the locations of the enclosures, and suspend it with stitches until it rises completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Be careful not to incise the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to raise the hernia if you do so; and use your discretion in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision made to the broken vessel:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a stitch (orp):
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be done in this way as with the stitches or of an acute point so that it does not injure the vein; and it should have a thick, flexible lion's head shape, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having an excessive thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hips in lands located in the south, such as Al-Andalus in Arabic lands and in the southern and arid lands of India with little fertility where there is neither herb nor tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body, other than the hips.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the intestines, such as venom inside the body coming from snakes and worms breeding between the intestines and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the onset of this condition is a swelling of that vein which occurs in the hip, and when the area is inflamed, the vein begins to flow from the location of that swelling, as if it were growing like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the limb appears, then you must cover it with a lead weight of about two drachms and bind it tightly to keep the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as this occurs outside, cover it with lead and leave it hanging.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the pain persists, you must make an incision on it and cover the remaining part; do not incise more than is necessary for it to come out, because if you incise too much, it becomes constricted, enters the flesh, causes abscesses, pus and ulcers in the area.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without leaving any trace in the intestines.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been born who are as long in length as five palms and more than ten, and it has been reported to me that one was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is incised during the time of treatment, insert the iron into the wound and perforate it with a long iron rod with the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location for some days with medicines; and cure it by treating abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes causes ramps, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and causes numerous abscesses, from each of which ramifications grow.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, cure it as has been said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the incision on worms generated under the skin and called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine disease in some lands because it often invades cattle and is a small worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, which grows throughout the body, rising and falling, and is eventually expelled through the bowels.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of some humors such as worms, snakes, larvae and tapeworms in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared due to its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it causes a strong stench and enters the nose and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so unless its movement and appearance are felt by the senses; and therefore, you must strengthen what is on top of it and what is below it and apply strong pressure, and then press down on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is tied in the flesh and does not burst, you must stop the cauterization with fire on the location until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it, which corrupts the location as has been said before.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see it reaching the head near the nose, strengthen and apply strong pressure on the forehead, press down on it and extract it; and the patient must use body cleansing with medicines that evacuate putrid humors and avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the incision on the disease of the liver (jaundice).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called jaundice in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is bound from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen this as I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were summoned to a sick woman at a village, and you found her arm exposed and saw a small inflammation on the vein of her arm, and although it had been opened for an hour, I saw that inflammation spreading as if worms were crawling towards this place, but more slowly than expected, as if silver was flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then, pain occurred in that area and settled into the muscle, and wait here for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then return to the other side of the body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I instructed him to rotate the body all around as I observed; and he was very surprised by the change in position and the swiftness of one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And he had seen similar things in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have observed more of those that change pain from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not observe it as much in the cases of women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not consider it to be only due to the woman being old, as the body and veins were exposed in such cases, and this manifested as a breathlessness that was changing.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not recur in those who are pleasing and have moist bodies with weak veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish the cure of it and the patient feels pain, do not approach the inflamed area as I have said, rather strengthen yourself on it and let it be slightly moist and cold over that area until that constriction is released, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your cases, then cure it by evacuating the body and expelling any breathlessness, and give him fumigations made with foul-smelling herbs and pills of serape and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and according to the places in the body where it grows, since its variety is that some have large points, small, concave, mute, are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those to which there are tongues; and of those to which are spikes.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the pain in which it grows is according to two methods: because the members or principal ones cause it, such as the brain, the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, the kidneys, the intestines, the bladder, and similar ones; and when it appears in any of these members and you notice signs of death, I recommend that you return to prevent it, because it is necessary to avoid extracting that sage in those cases where death occurs quickly in the one in which it is most serious, and when you do not see such bad signs, and the sage is not concealed in the depth of the member, then you take it out and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of serpents is when you find sage, pierce the bone and it emerges from the cavity that is above the brain, which happens due to violent soda, blindness, dizziness, hotness in the body, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech becomes faint and destroyed, and the voice is lost, and there comes out from the wound site white moisture similar to dust, and eyes like watery flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the sage unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the sage that grow in the heart, which is near the left nipple, are as if it were embedded in a hard cause, and not empty; and strong movement of the sage resembles the movement of the thumb, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is loss of heat at the extremities, sweating, and fainting; therefore, know that death is imminent.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the spear has pricked the lung specifically with bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are applied, and the patient's color is changed, and they exhale a great spirit and ask for air in distress.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the spear pierces the covering which is in the foot, and pain occurs near the small bones of the ribs, and it causes great and intense pain with heavy sighing, and he is not able to move all his limbs due to muscle pain.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the spear pierces the stomach, immediately there will be a foul smell coming from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the spear pierces the abdomen and is lodged there, a tear or hole appears in the wound, or the intestine or hernia that was torn apart cannot be removed, and there is no hope for healing from the extraction of the spear.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the spear pierces the bladder and is expelled outside along with urine, and it causes infection outside, and strong pain occurs in the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	However, other members such as the head, neck, throat, neck, gullet, shoulders, and their similar parts of the limbs, such as the spine, collarbone, pelvis, hip, waist, and their counterparts, are saved provided that the spear does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you be aware of these spears since they can indicate the nature of the wound for healing purposes.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man a spear enters the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extract it from the other side, leaving the hair of the eyebrow undamaged, and it heals without causing harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another spear from a Jew who it had entered in him at the root of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the spear was already hidden and could not be found except for a small tip adhering to its shaft, and it was a sharp spear of Turkish origin with a lion's head without hair.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is unharmed, and there is no adverse effect on his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another spear from a Christian who it had been shot in the neck, and it was an Arabic spear with feathers; and then I cut into it between two guide-lines, and it was submerged in his neck; and then I softened it with that, and placed my hand over it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another spear from a man who it had been shot in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of that; but since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to his actions, I cut into the spear and carefully removed it, and he recovered without any further injury.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man who had been shot in the back, and the wound had healed over, but after six years, I extracted the spear at its source.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had been shot in the stomach, and the wound had healed inside her, and there was no change in her condition despite taking medication, and the woman suffered no harm from any of her natural activities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had been shot in the face and the wound healed, but when I removed the spear, there was no further pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the spear from the man of the king who it had been shot in the middle of his nose and had started to protrude slightly on the right side and was completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him three days after the wounding by the spear.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the spear, which was not very deep; and I tested it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; but I felt a prick under the right eyebrow, and therefore suspected that the prick was from the tip of the spear.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I spread the area with a plaster containing astringent and digestive properties, assuming that the area was covered so that it would appear to me the location of the spear, so that I could cut into it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no adverse effect in the area that indicated that the spear had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster over it for several days without any further injury; and the wound healed in the meantime, and the patient recovered from the extraction of it within a few days until one day he felt the spear inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I covered the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until it opened, and with the probe, I felt its tip, and I removed the tip of the spear gently from the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Approach the wound in the opening of the injury with that sharp medicine as soon as the tip of the arrow becomes visible to my eyes, and pass some time with it for up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When the wound is swollen, make it possible for forceps to enter it and secure them in place without moving. Then do not stop refining and inventing means to treat it until a day comes with suitable forceps to remove it; and when this has been done, restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some doctors thought that the nose cartilage had not been restored, and you restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was cured by complete health, and never suffered in any way from it again.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows for which you will have to follow this rule and significance on what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood through narrative or by reading these books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsman compares a little with much; and what is present on what is absent; and he must use new operations and new instruments to deal with the strange causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not lost from the limbs in which they are inserted except by two means: either through attraction to the place in which they were inserted; or through the opposite side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And the one that was shot into the place where it entered or was an arrow made of flesh and was shot and lost.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not move at the moment when it is shot, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it has healed and the attraction and its exit have been alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is inserted in the bone and you do not move, then leave it for several days and turn it with attraction and movement every day, and it will be lost.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not move for some days, then you must perforate the surrounding tissue of the arrow around that bone with a fine instrument to enlarge the area around it, and then remove it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the arrow is inserted in the bone of the skull and has passed through one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient with some of those accidents that I have mentioned, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it until the patient's condition stabilizes for several days; because if the arrow reaches the cistern, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is not inserted into the bone but only enters the body and does not reach the cistern, and the patient remains for several days without any of those accidents occurring, then you invent a means of attracting the arrow and the area around it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not moved and you do not remove it, then administer several treatments around the arrow as recommended, and take care of the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow has been hidden in the body and is not felt, then you must search for it with examination, and if you feel it, then shoot it out with suitable instruments appropriate for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot move it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and it is not a bone or nerve or vein here, then make an incision over the wound until it can be enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If there are any wounds around it that must be kept, then you must cut the flesh in which it is inserted on all sides with all the skill at your disposal; and invent something, if you cannot move it due to the evasion of the flesh in the breakage of the auricles and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the removal of the arrow in any location where it is, you must use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and refine it with the greatest subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is removed with great difficulty due to its attraction and extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot operate at that time, leave it for several days until the swellings around it can subside, and then repeat the process when it has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If the flow of blood opposes your treatment, administer what was said in its section for cure.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Watch over the virtue of incision in vein or nerve, or cord, and administer every possible means to avoid the escape of pus; perform it with ease, calm, delay, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, compress the abscess to make the patient conform to the figure in which you must lance the abscess; it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But abscesses that are located opposite another part, or which cause one part to spread over the other parts, or cause swelling in the outer part of the abscess by sensation of the part above the cavity and sometimes protruding; in this case you should incise it; and make the incision according to the size at which the forceps grasp it; and tie it, as it is easily cut off.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, you must twist the lancet contrary to its direction until the abscess enters the bone, and widen it, then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave it for several days, then repeat the process until it bursts open.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the fistula of the abscess is in that area, you must push it with something.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the fistula is cut and you wish to administer pressure, introduce your finger into it, if it is closed, use a spoon concave on the inside so that it enters the concavity of the fistula and press it with something.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the abscess is concave, you must press it with a strong spoon inserted into it, as the abscess is relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the abscess is surrounded by hard tissue, you must cut away all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the abscess occurs on the foot, belly, bladder, chest, or side and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and if it is possible to incise over it, do so, be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Make forceps for lancing abscesses:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The tips of them are made like a bird's beak that is made with a saw when they grasp the abscess so it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made different sizes: large, few, and medium-sized forceps, according to the size of the abscess and its contents, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Make a spoon-shaped instrument with this concave tip like the beak of a bird, to relieve the obstruction in the abscess and push out the closed one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Make an instrument for pushing out a closed one:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod to relieve the obstruction in the concave abscess and push it with that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venesection (phlebotomy).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins to be cut for phlebotomy, it is customary to make a cut of 30. in the head, there are 16 veins to be cut for phlebotomy. There are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, called auricular veins; there are two herbs that are in the two temples; and there are two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, called lacrimal veins; and the vein located at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two veins that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called "angular" (I assume it's a typo for "anterior"); and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are cut in the arms are 5. Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to let the wild goose fly; the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a minor vein, and it is made up of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people call it "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is paused at the domestic artery, and it is called "cephalic," and the vulgar people call it "the abdominal vein"; the biceps brachii, and it is located above the elbow, and it is the one that is cut, and it appears on the outside; the cephalic, and it is the vein between the previously mentioned one and the next one, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins: one of those is called the great saphenous vein, which is located at the bend of the large toe; the second is the small saphenous, and its location is the back of the thigh of the large toe; the third is the sciatic vein, and its location is the back of the thigh of the large toe; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The support for the veins that are near the ears is useful for treating ancient catarrhs, migraines, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be shaved the patient's head, and the patient's head should be wiped in the occipital area at the locations of both veins with a large, clean cloth; press the patient's neck with one hand using a bandage that shows the locations of their ears in two places pressed on the sides of the patient's head; and try that method, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is the test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical lancet, which is pointed, and insert it into the vein in the cavity to the bone where the blood flows out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and cavity to the incisions above, and cut the vein with a pointed instrument.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers' width or approximately that amount, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And press the pulse and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And at the beginning of this book, the incision and cauterization of those have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arterial veins at the temples, the benefit of bleeding is for migraines, old and chronic ailments of the eyes, and acute corpus disorders in the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck so that both veins are felt with clear perception, and show the pulse of their pulses with your finger; then you will know if the test is successful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift the cavity over the vein at the incisions indicated by your finger, insert the lancet with a pointed tip below, and lift the vein upwards; cut it in this way as you did with the other veins; and let the blood flow out according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And unbind the patient's swelling, place your finger over the vein for an hour, and press on that spot and hold it firmly, then leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the reminder of them, as well as their incision and attraction, has been given at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the benefit of bleeding the vein on the forehead is similar to bleeding the occipital vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of bleeding that is as I recommend to you: the patient should hold their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and take the instrument called the cautery, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Press the pointed end of the instrument at the top of the fossory vein and strike it with a blow or in another manner, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you wish; then unbind the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes bleeding is opened with the cautery, but it should not be done with a very sharp point as in other bleedings; instead, it should be from a broad point, and bleed it transversely because the bone is close and strong, and the bone may easily break when the cautery is fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes for eyelid inflammation due to redness and swelling in the eyes, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bleeding is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage, and you bleed them, standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Make the bleeding transverse in width less than one finger at the tip because there is not much tissue in that location; and if the bleeding is fine, its tip is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the blood flow out as much as you need, press on that spot, hold it for a moment, then unbind them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But bleeding from the nose vein is useful for treating acute fever and violent vomiting, facial diseases, migraines, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of bleeding that is as I recommend to you: the patient holds their neck and places your left hand under their nose, and take the fine lancet long enough and put it in the middle of the nostril where the vein is not felt, because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you gradually withdraw your hand from the lancet and let the blood flow out according to your need, and hold it for a moment because it recovers easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The advantage of flebotomy of the two veins (guidegui) leads to constriction, the beginning of leprosy, and various bad illnesses, as well as inflammations and corrosive ulcers, such as hydrophrenia.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of that flebotomy is such that the patient must remain quiet on the bed with his head elevated, and the practitioner is over the patient's head.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make the vein incision long and shallow, making the incision little by little; and remove blood as needed or as much as seems necessary; and make the other vein resemble it.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then relax the patient and gently tie both veins with a moderate constriction to ensure that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let them rest until the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantage of vein flebotomy for varicose veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and decay of gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers around the nose and the area around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of that flebotomy is such that you must hold the patient still, keep their head elevated with a bandage, and turn their lips to show both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because around those veins there are many small black veins; and then make an incision in each one using an incision instrument.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you have doubt about which one is that, then make an incision in the larger of them, and make a clear determination from their swelling.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a comparison of the veins on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are under the tongue, it is more advantageous for flebotomy of the cephalic to treat prostration that is in the throat, throat problems, and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of flebotomizing them is that the patient lies between your legs, and elevates their tongue, and looks down at it, from one side you see one vein and from the other side you see another vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make an incision in each one; but be careful not to damage your hand when flebotomizing them, as they are arteries below.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are flebotomized in the neck are those where it is customary in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done in two ways, either by applying myrtle oil or olive oil with decreasing fineness; or by cauterizing with a flebotomy knife and calling it alnessil, and this is the name of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnesil is for cutting and these are the sharp and subtle instruments according to the width of the veins and the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Recipe for myrtle flebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It may be the case that you will have to open convex veins full of apparent thick blood, and those containing coarse, dark blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	Recipe for olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This flebotomy is smaller in size and with a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for flebotomizing fine veins containing thin blood of lemon.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The benefit of the venous lancing (phlebotomy) of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it draws blood from sicknesses that are of the back and neck, and from what sciatica and stomach pain occur.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when lancing (phlebotomy) that vein, to be careful and be cautious since there is an artery nearby, and if he errs or accidentally punctures the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut the artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, it is not advisable to perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument but with a blunt one like a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica vein does not appear due to a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you should look for another one or seek its branch or find the end of the arm, since it appears clearly there; and cut (phlebotomize) it with a blunt instrument as has been said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want to perform phlebotomy at the wrist, then it is necessary in front of the narrow part of the arm that you touch the place up to where you recognize the location of the hands, and put a pad over it; and hold the arm and cut the vein with a concave instrument (such as a lancet) as has been said; and be careful to make the percussion sound in a certain space from the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you feel, as the ligament is tense, swell in the location that you have indicated with a pad, then that swelling is due to the artery and it will move away from there.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see blood flow in the phlebotomy like that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then you know it is from the artery; and you must hold your hand over that area for a long time; and lift your hand away if the blood flows, since many veins are cut if the blood flows frequently, then you must tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the patient from his moisture (discharge), be careful and do not let him move it for several days until he is cured.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not flow (stopped), and you find that you do not have medicine for it, then cut the artery if it appears to you; since its end will contract and the blood will stop flowing; or take a fistula, make an incision in it and take one of its ends and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowing between the ligament and pulses until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the blood flows (unstopped), that is good; otherwise, treat it with the remedy that was given earlier to remember the location of the powders causing bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of blood from there is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the tightness of the ligament in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But the phlebotomy of the dark vein (vena fusca) is beneficial as it draws blood from the superior part of the head and the lower part of the body; since it is composed of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, as has been said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in the phlebotomy of that area, since there is a nerve nearby; and if he accidentally hits it during the puncture of the vein, it will cause numbness, and healing will be difficult and it may not heal completely. This nerve often appears in sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, then you must stop phlebotomy with that instrument and avoid the nerve using your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then make the vein incision longitudinal (along its length).
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with facial swellings.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy with a blunt instrument (lancet) or a sharp instrument (needle), since the puncture is safe for all veins as it does not contain an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless it is necessary for you to perform phlebotomy that the point of the instrument does not pierce the tip of the skin excessively, and look for a lighter place, and not notice it if it is not felt after the initial percussion with the phlebotomy, as long as there are some veins in that area.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Nevertheless, in some men, it is painful (swollen) when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but the swelling does not appear later on.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of that phlebotomy and its accidents are various, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that you must know that phlebotomy is administered only in the conservation of health and with hope for it, and as a precaution against illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, fusca, or basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in the spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when there are signs of swelling.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let a phlebotomy be performed, and on the third day or at the first opportunity that has passed three hours since noon.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, phlebotomy must be performed when it is appropriate and necessary according to the patient's condition, either during daytime or nighttime, at any hour and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is necessary that an infant should not be bled before they turn twelve years old, and a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month at the earliest, and the elderly should not be bled who are already over sixty years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And whoever wishes to be bled by any method must prepare their intestines before the bleeding with a lion's clyster, if there is any wound or fissure in them, so that the superfluous fluid does not enter the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that it does not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Nor should bleeding be performed on patients with nausea or constipation, nor on those suffering from illness or drunkenness until the condition has passed, nor on patients with dropsy, but rather bleeding is feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the liver and kidneys and excessive exercise, fasting, vigils, or any cause that dissolves virtue, either corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And one must take into account the subtlety of humors before the bleeding if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and with medications, if it is feasible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And one must enter into bathing if there is no reason to prevent it, or exercise in any way so that the blood may be made subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bleeding should cease on the foot of the day, that is to say around third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And therefore that the foot of that day is kept on that day from all animal and bodily mishaps, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily strains, such as excessive labor and pain and heat and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its storage, place the causes to be used in accordance with the custom of men with aromatics and scent and balms and similar to them according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the bloodletter over a cushion that is raised above that of the patient who must be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And pull out the arm, and rub it with your hand the bloodletter two or three times, and strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The tightening should be done carefully, for when the tightening is not enough, or the tightening is with superfluidity, you must prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with mollification, then you must prohibit the corset of the blood immediately.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And the tightening must be done, it is necessary that the patient who must be bled rubs their hands together on them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the bloodletter anoints his blade with a little bit of ancient oil, and then places his left hand on the vein at the place where the bleeding is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is stopped because it is one of those veins that are found like strings fleeing, and from them comes ventosity, and when the bleeding is paused over there, it must be contracted by the bleeding, and it is discovered, and the bleeding does not open the vein, and if it opens, it is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, the bloodletter must be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is pierced in one go, that is good; and if not, you must wait a little longer at that place or hurry up, if the place is not apophthegmatized (?).
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apophthegmatized (?), or the patient feels fearful, you must leave it for a day or two, and not tighten the ligament because it will draw out an apostemic cauterization, nor enter into bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the bleeding if the wound is still there.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that the amount of blood will not come out as desired, then repeat the bleeding in that place according to the rule and adjust the opening a little, and do it quickly before the place is apophthegmatized (?), because in many people a large opening should be made sparingly.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if the opening has already apophthegmatized (?), then you do not repeat it over there because no excuse is given to you; and pause on some part of the oil-wound, for it alleviates the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this place is better with oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, an oil-wound is administered in all bleeding where the prohibition of corsets must be observed on the blood vessels, and make Tyriacum alfadoc and sagenea when it is stopped from one of them on the place, for the blood is made subtle and is returned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large apostema is generated in the place of bleeding, which often happens to those who are not well bled immediately or when the vein opening is small, then you must catch it, and pause over that place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It must be done to bring this compress against the blood of that vein with its completion or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If it remains in the area for some days with any blackness or greenish discoloration, do not notice it; and if you want, place a plaster made of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a plaster made of mint juice or camphor or similar on it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times abscesses and protrusions occur in the basilica, you must use lancet incision.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find softness you must place the compress on it, then that protrusion is bad; and therefore be careful to place a plaster of what I mentioned above, for strong blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Make an ointment with what is stiffening, to harden the area, and treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It must be to draw blood from everyone according to the amount of its power and according to the color that prevails in the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness until it has been dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For the one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on one day, let the incision of the vein be widened and the incisions be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In a weak person, do the opposite of this, and in such a case let blood be drawn too little, and let the cuts be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for vein incision is to make a cross section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of vein incision is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more acceptable and safer than vein incision according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where fainting usually occurs, you should perform bloodletting, and it is necessary to take care of him before bloodletting with a small piece of bread soaked in milk-granules or simple oxymel soup; and let out some blood from him for three days or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If it is inflammation of the complexion, take before bloodletting a drink infused with myrrh or honey-infusion flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or a scented and fragrant drink.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, you must perform bloodletting, and it is necessary to drink water of meat and fragrant infusion, and use aromatics and be careful with your feet on that occasion.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Who wants to alleviate his arm and thin his blood daily, it is necessary for the one whose bloodletting is excessive evacuation, and the power of him is fragile, let him thin his blood little by little, as much as the power in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to alleviate his arm and expel blood on occasion, and his body is strong, let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to increase the amount of blood in his body contrary to the direction it flows, let him do this on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in the body in which the blood is already heated and sharp, causing fever, it is necessary to expel that blood from his body on one occasion and let a large amount of blood be drawn out and make a wide incision until fainting occurs, so that you will have preserved all the conditions for bloodletting; and you must place your hand over the pulse of him, so as not to cause death in the place of fainting, for many times this happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and expel blood daily as the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult for blood to flow out, that you press hard on him with force and straighten it slightly, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until it is bloodletted again; or repair the problem caused by coagulated blood in the vein orals with turmeric or sage and cover it with a light compress until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is abscessed, let it be left alone and do not touch it until the abscess is subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if there is a need to expel blood again, and it is not an excuse, let him make an incision on that place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "thread of the arm" is bloodletted in the area of the groin or basilica when it is not constricted or numb, as it is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the probe becomes blocked and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Approach it tightly on the one who is in pain with the narrow constriction; and perform foley (or catheterization) along the small transverse one, not longitudinally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make an opening that is wide and your foley should be such that you catheterize it on the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, you must irrigate your hand in cold water and allow the blood to run into it until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, you are exempt from irrigating the hand with cold water, and in winter, the body should be immersed in cold water at certain times.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The catheterization of this vein is safer than all the other veins because it has no pulsating vein or nerve afterward.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The catheterization of the cube of the right hand is given to liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the catheterization is that you tighten the hand or your hand, since it has been placed in cold water, until the vein swells and is clearly visible to the eye. Then catheterize it transversely. If you insert it deep into it, nothing will be noticed by the eye.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to harm your hand during the catheterization because there are exposed nerves of the fingers.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And perform irrigation on the hand with cold water and let the blood run through it because if you do not irrigate it with cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice and its flow is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as blood is extracted according to the required quantity, you must pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not hardened too much; similarly, you should do the same for every branch (of the vein).
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the advantage of catheterizing the vein of the left hand is that it is given to spleen diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same in the catheterization of this as you did with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the saphenous vein catheterization is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as scrotal diseases, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the genitals and old sores, and their similarities to other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the catheterization is that the patient immerses their foot in cold water and performs friction on it until the veins are clearly visible. Then, over the joint of the ankle with a strap (or band), one should place the location of the vein that will be incised, and from there, the vein's branches should be cut off at the surface of the foot as much as possible.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so, you should open the abscess wide or allow the bed to be lowered, for the leg's addition is better and more healthful.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you are opening the abscess on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are below it, and make an incision through which you can drain.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let the incisions (i.e., cuts) be made with the lancet.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, the bleeding should not be allowed; you should irrigate the foot with warm water and allow the blood to run into that container where it can be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the lancet user errs in the first look, then you irrigate again with the lancet in a little while, for the place is clean; and do not fear the trickery, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Do the same with the swelling on the other foot accordingly.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is to be below the heel of the hip on the wild side.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The help for the lancing of that (i.e., the sciatic vein) is to apply a hot compress to the pain in the lower back when it is due to bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the lancing (i.e., the procedure) is that the patient takes a bath, fasts, and strengthens their loins from the lower part of the waist to above the heel for four days with a long, fine bandage, which should not be removed except by that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you should lance that according to each device that is possible for you and according to the transverse (i.e., across), and this is better; or you may incise it with an incision or cut it with a section, for the place is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many weak men; and if that disappears and does not appear to the sensation of everything, then you should lance any opening from there, and that is the one which appears on the top of the foot towards the ear and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And loosen the constriction (i.e., the swelling or blockage) and place your hand over the site of the lancing, holding it firmly, for it will heal easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventouse and of the qualities (i.e., uses) of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventouses are for corns, or eruptions, or wounds.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventouse is done in two ways: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is without incision (i.e., a suction ventouse).
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventouse done without incision can be performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventouses administered with incision and extraction of blood are in twelve places of the body, among which one is where ventouse is applied, and that is at the ankle; and the mid-point of the neck; and ventouses on the chin below the jaw more below the mouth; and ventouses of two spoons; and ventouses of aloes, and that is near the end of the intestine; and ventouses of two cups, and they are from the elbows; and ventouses of two thighs; and ventouses of two hands.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventouse does not drain the blood but rather from small veins scattered in the flesh, and so it does not capture its virtue as in lancing; nor is it necessary that ventouse be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by a blockage inside before the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if it is necessary due to illness or chronic condition, administer ventouse at all times at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of that and at some other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	That is because in some men, blood multiplies within them before it needs to be extracted by ventouse and causes a severe headache; and of those who have a blockage and heat or swelling on their face and head, and in their neck; and of those who have a purulent discharge on their face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of the ventouse site is affected; and of those whose laughter is increased; and of those who taste blood in their mouth or whose tongue is coated and spits blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who have blood in their dreams, heat, old sores and other similar causes for them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And so when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is around the third or middle of the month, then you command that ventouse be performed after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And an additional benefit of ventouse on the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and thus it is sunken into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by total evacuation of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventouse is at the site of lancing in the skull (i.e., cranium).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not permissible to use that which is for complete cleansing or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that, it is not necessary to use old remedies in heads where there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Furthermore, to avoid forgetfulness from continuing on it, you must command the leecher to place his hand a little near the veins away from the area, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Instead of leeching at the site of phlebotomy on the vein of the basilica and the great vein: this confers asthma, constriction of the lungs and the division of the stomach muscle, cough, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is necessary that the leeching be gently stopped, for if it is left in place, it causes weakness of the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The leeching of the skull confers headaches and otolaryngitis, migraines, fever, pain in the roots of the teeth; it is at the site of phlebotomy on the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It is necessary to command the leecher not to press his hand against a scratch so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The leeching away from the chin confers alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, resemblance to diseases that are in the mouth, and it is at the site of phlebotomy on the vein named alisheric, which is in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The leeching between the two cheeks confers catarrh, which is caused by retention of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The leeching between the two parts deep within the eyes confers, at the same time, phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, the facial and the cerebral, for it attracts blood from all those superficial veins that are in the flesh, and the small veins from other veins deeper until it reaches the attraction to the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the leecher not to proceed with scratching, for the area is denuded of flesh, and nerves and arteries are exposed there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a leeching that is applied to the anus and confers diarrhea of the rectum and ulcers thereafter.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary to command the leecher that the leeching should be large and made of a ram's horn, for the area requires a strong cut; and a strong, pointed leeching made from a thin piece of horn should be scratched with a scratch.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Smaller leechings in the armpits for minor manifestation, as they will draw blood from the entire body, and confer old coughs of the lungs and uterus, and of the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and confer swelling and edema; they are at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and at the elbow and ankle.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, excessive bleeding from all over the body causes fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the leeching at the elbow joint confers, at the same time, the benefit of the leeching at both arms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the positioning of the leechings is that you place the leeching at first sight and suck it up with timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the leeches, but remove them lightly, and keep them moist, and let the humors come to the area by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the area redden, swell and the scab of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and pay attention to the positioning of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man with thin skin and rare pores, it is necessary that you scratch once and not more, to avoid ulcers at the area.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the leecher to make the incision wide and deepen it a little, and take the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you scratch twice, for in the first scratching, the channel of fineness to the blood and to its wateriness is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second one, the persistent pursuit of the extraction of thick blood is sought.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very mucus-like, it is necessary that a third scratching be made so as to achieve the end result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract little blood or a small amount, this is sufficient with one scratching.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract much blood, we scratch with many scratches; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to scratch deeply.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scratching" refers only to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas of leeching be treated gently, resolved with more resolution; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of daisies, or oil of camomile, or similar ones. And if it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, oil of lily, oil of camomile, or similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the superfluity is thick, use oil of myrrh, oil of balsam, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the ligature is wide and soft in flesh, it must be forbidden to oil it, and it must be required that the locations of ligation near them are washed with warm water or water from salts, or water of cochineal, or water of borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	For the one whose blood is of damp humidity, wash their ligatures with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	For the one with thick superfluities, wash their ligatures with vinegar, or water of wormwood, or dill which is greater annual, or decoction of fennel, or camomile, similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The ligation should be kept away from bathing; it must be administered immediately next to the bath for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the ligature.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	It is necessary that the windpipe (trachea) of a person about to be bled (phlebotomy) be restrained before ligation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	You must consider at the beginning: if the ligature or the one who is to be bled has a hot and windy blood, you must take cooling measures, such as milkwort acetic, and wormwood and lettuce, and dandelion, and juniper, and similar ones.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, acidic foods, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	For the one with cold complexion, take emesis of alum water or anemarrhena root, sumac, and a moderately strong smelling herb between autumn and spring; it is commanded to drink sparingly and eat little, and pause their food from poultry, canabis, fish, and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it must be that on the day of ligation and bleeding, drink more than eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it must be given to drink in some hours to certain men turmeric elixir or medicine of musk, which is musk or celery root before ligation or bleeding or near, so that the main members are comforted and the blood becomes thin; and they should not take that scalp oil.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ligations which are not scratched (incised) are the ones stopped near the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the joints of the fingers, and in the ankle, because these members cannot bear incision upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And not for these (ligations) is desired attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a ligature on the nipple in sickness of blood flow of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold inviscid windiness of the member, such as stopping on the abdomen and umbilicus; because it thins the member and soothes it, reduces pain as it resolves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it has been stopped on the nostrils when they occur in their opening or pore, because by the strong attraction it overcomes the opening and eradicates the pore from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when stopped on the liver and spleen it holds windiness in those places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These ligatures are administered with juice alone; others are sometimes administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Others are sometimes administered full of hot water in sickness of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is why the ligature should be filled and made larger, which is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs are infused.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ligature administered with fire: The width of the orifice should be the size of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the thread should be as large as a palm; and in the thickness of it, at the site where it is in the circumference, the thickness should be the same, the trough should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Made of yarrow or lemon balm with thick edges, lion's tooth and smooth for it not to damage the member due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a horizontal bar of yarrow or iron where the candle is stopped with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ligature should be much larger than the one we recommended earlier; and the small amount of it according to the sickness and the state of the one who uses that one.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The ligatures of infants and extended ones are others than the ligatures of young people and large-sized throats.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of stopping this ligature with fire on the member is that it stretches the meat with fire properly in front of a little candle of wax, and stops it on the middle of the horizontal bar in the middle place of the ligature, so that the fire is lit around the sides of it to prevent burning the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it is to be stopped on the member of the patient, and it should be on the trough that we have mentioned, until when we have the ligatures and do not need to hold it down and let the steam come out over the trough, then the ligature will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And burn the meat according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A vacuum that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, without a transverse or longitudinal fissure, and it is not administered unless filled with water, and it is placed only on the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the vacuum, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital. 107.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuggae are not administered in any member, but only in the members where it is impossible to apply vacuums due to their small size, such as the mouth and gum-like areas; or in denuded flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those found Sanguisuggae is to find them in muddy freshwater pools.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid out in muddy water for the day and night, and no cause remains in their belly; and evacuate the body first with flebotomy and vacuums; and cool the patient's limbs before they swell; and lay them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and closed. This sentence likely refers to the Sanguisuggae, which suggests that once they have been cleaned in muddy water, they should be filled with something (likely a medicinal substance) and sealed. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to extract juice from the area with the vacuum, it is more helpful as a remedy. This sentence suggests that using the vacuum (likely for bloodletting or draining fluid) and collecting the resulting juice (possibly for analysis or treatment purposes) is beneficial.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and apply coarse water, and rub and squeeze it. This sentence suggests that if it's not possible to extract juice from the area using a vacuum, then it should be washed with vinegar and coarse water, and then rubbed and squeezed. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body's wound has prolonged bleeding and the Sanguisuggae are not effective, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on it, and let it rest until the bleeding stops. This sentence suggests that if the wound continues to bleed after applying the Sanguisuggae (likely bloodletting or draining fluid), then a cold cloth should be applied to stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wound multiplies, then sprinkle vitriol triturated or similar stiptics substances over it until the wound is drained; or lay the largest pieces of cooked fava beans over the area until they adhere to the wound, and the wound is drained. This passage suggests that if the wound becomes infected or multiplies, certain substances (likely antiseptics) can be applied to kill bacteria and promote healing, or larger pieces of cooked fava beans can be placed on the wound to help draw out pus and promote healing. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repeat the application of Sanguisuggae when they can be replaced. This sentence suggests that if the wound continues to bleed or become infected, the application of the Sanguisuggae (likely bloodletting or draining fluid) should be repeated, and new ones used as needed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the Sanguisuggae are forbidden for suspension, then wash the area with recent or old blood or insert a needle into the area where bleeding occurs; and let them rest, as they will quickly stop bleeding. This passage suggests that if the use of Sanguisuggae is prohibited, an alternative method can be used to stop bleeding: washing the wound with fresh or old blood, or inserting a needle into the bleeding site. The purpose of this is to prevent further bleeding and promote healing.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to adhere, sprinkle a little powdered allium sativum (garlic), salt or ashes on them and let them dry immediately. This passage suggests that if the Sanguisuggae are used for bloodletting or draining fluid, they can be made to adhere by sprinkling them with powdered garlic, salt, or ashes, and letting them dry quickly. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Similarly, the process for the third part begins: restoration. This suggests that the previous discussion (presumably about treating wounds and infections) is now transitioning to a new topic, which may be related to wound healing or recovery from illness. The specific focus of this section is not specified in the text you provided.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very important for the practice of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocation accidents in the bones. This suggests that the new topic (likely related to wound healing or recovery from illness) will focus on treating fractures and dislocations of the bones, which is an essential aspect of medical practice.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people boast about this chapter; and those who do not read the works of the Ancients nor learn anything from them for a long time. This suggests that although this chapter may be important in the practice of medicine, it is often overlooked or dismissed by some practitioners, particularly those who do not follow the teachings of the ancient medical texts.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the method of these scholars in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it in a short time, and I have not used what follows, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of their teachings, until I extracted the science from them. This suggests that the author acknowledges that this medical knowledge is often kept secret and not widely available, but they have learned it through extensive study and application of the ancient medical texts. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct yourself to experimentation and study for a long time. This suggests that the author encourages the reader to continue learning, experimenting, and studying in order to gain a deeper understanding of medicine and improve their skills as a practitioner. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the essential knowledge and upon which much experimentation has been performed; therefore, I condense it for you and relieve you of excessive occupation; and condense it at the end of the condensation; and show it at the end of the demonstration; and form many forms of instruments that are administered in this, as shown through additional explanations, just as I have done in two preceding chapters. This suggests that the author has already covered the main points of this chapter in detail, but will now summarize the information for the reader to make it more accessible and concise. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
Capitol primier.	Title (Capitol) First
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and Compilation of the Causes of Fractures of Bones, from which the preliminary is necessary before we begin to recall the fractures of members and the various kinds of each (of them).
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin the introduction of this chapter by giving the summation of the discourse; and the chapters following will be understood by those who are experts and stationed at the truth of these subjects; so it is for you and for those who can learn or understand this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or displacement occurs, it is necessary to begin with trepanation or ligation of the place, or whichever one, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as debility in strength, or if it is the case that the person is at rest, or old age, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be filled with food consisting of lettuces and meats of birds and crabs; and forbid heavy meats and filling with food or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized aposteme, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual care with which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat flour and water, rice, cabbage, peas, beef, veal, mutton, pork, large fish and similar ones, and with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones that are broken in men of old age and the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs, and those that are in the final stage of maturity are continued and consolidated, such as the bones of newborn infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects some cause similar to a glue on the broken bone in any part, causing swelling that adheres and strengthens it until it is also consolidated, until the end of softness and weakness comes, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit this from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, foods that are heavy, viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fracture depends on the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone in the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and the fracture of the bone in the foot is different from the fracture of the bone in the hand; and similarly all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fracture within itself is discussed below.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The types of bone fractures are diversified in their details; for there is a curved fracture and one that occurs at the star, and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and there are the fractures of the shin and ankle and addictions, such as those produced by blows and those not produced by them, such as the fracture in the penis when it is prepared for writing, and the fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and the fracture with a crack.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own remedy or torture in restoring it, as will be remembered separately for each one.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For this is how bone fracture is recognized: it shows twisting of the limb, and the prominence and appreciation of the injury in sensation, and it is that which you compress with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no obvious twisting in the place, or it is not felt during examination, you must press the bone with movement and if the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be twisting or a small crack, in which case you must press on it with your hand and compress it all; pause over the medicine of which the remedy appropriate to the place will be remembered at this moment; and it should be held tightly by traction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that if the place is curved and not cut in two or something else does not occur in the shin, as for example, the entire circumference of its comparison is affected, then it is necessary to begin from your time at the rectification of it, having first applied cauterized aposteme.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if a cauterized aposteme has occurred, leave it for several days until the aposteme ceases; and bind it according to any method that you can do with gentleness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of the limb and the alignment of the fractured bone is easier than in a shinbone where this has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen it according to what will be remembered for its remedy.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are splinters in the bones, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with cords, or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place your position such that the injured member is extended according to its natural figure, while the parts are being extended from the broken member, then proceed to make it return to its original position with tools and in whatever way you can manage at their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful that your actions do not harm or injure the patient, and proceed as your strength allows to apply one bone to another in the best possible ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary at that time to apply your hand skillfully to it (the bone), and if you find any other cause there, correct it and align it according to the amount of your force.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Apply forceful extension and compression, as foolish doctors do when they cause abscess or caution to occur through their actions, or as we have seen happen through the action of those foolish doctors.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Bring together, align and perform decent operation and tightening on that member, rest and tranquility; advise the patient to avoid moving in this time of his vigilance and sleep, and observe his rotation and agitation, and you should manage all his movements with your entire force; and wait to see if the position of the member is a position in which pain occurs, which cause is that when it feels pain in the disposition of the location of the painful or injured member; then it is necessary to change its position to another in which it does not feel pain; and be careful to ensure that its position is straight and aligned, so that no deformity occurs in the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the tightening of a broken member is the one I recommend, because you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the elbow and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, like the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the wrapping be broad and hard, because the thickness connects the large and strengthens it all over with tightening, in order to prevent infection.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin, align your evacuation with convenience, place firmly suitable coverings on it (the fracture), three or four depending on the member's need; and strengthen your hand slightly with the linen.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And bring it up to the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen a little more than your tightening with which you have tightened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And bring the wrapping of the location of the fracture out slightly, and loosen the tightening little by little, until you grasp a large part of the location.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And bring another bandage and wrap it over the injured location with the wrapping, and bring the wrappings to the part below the fracture; and your operation should be in tightening the bandage and loosening it according to what I have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And bring padding of leather or fabric to straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And place another bandage on it, and bring padding over these well-made stitches immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location, and then place it on the abscess site and stop the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you strengthen over the stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stitches should be made of strong cane reeds or well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm ramps; and their size according to this form and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and harder than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to the member's size and smallness; and strengthen over the stitches with another bandage according to your initial tightening; and tie it up above with thread properly, as I have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the location of the fracture more, and when it is farther from the fracture, it should be less tight.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and be of flax; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some fools using ropes of twisted flax, it is a great error when the narrowness equals [the affected area].
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	However, very thin threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve the desired narrowness with them, and it is necessary that between each stitch there be the width of one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is afflicted by the tips of the stitches near the narrowness in those places, then place a stopper made of beeswax or felt there to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fracture occurs along with an abscess, and it happens in the sutures, and I will recall it again in the chapter on special cases.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that it is not necessary to suture all broken members immediately; the reason being that when a member is large, it is not necessary to stitch it on the first day but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the development of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that ancient physicians used to restore, which involved suturing fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Common plaster method for fracture restoration, suitable for complex cases and more commonly for women and children, since it is on what neither heat nor friction acts: you must take powder from the mill, and it is the medlar pit that you should grind in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should prepare it in this way, unless you sieve it with albumen of egg, and the mixture should be neither too thick nor too thin; and use that [preparation].
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of immobilizing fractures, dislocations, and twists is to use an ointment made from asafetida, lapis Lazarus, acacia, elm, myrrh, and aloe vera, all equal parts by weight of about one drachm; of frankincense and aloe wood, half a drachm each; alcohol or egg white if the patient's condition is scalded; apply this ointment as it has a good composition that restores broken bones gently and confers strength to weak men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of immobilizing a fracture or twist is to use an ointment made from myrrh, aloe vera, frankincense, and elm, all equal parts by weight of one drachm; white clay, half a drachm each; and Armenian pitch in large quantities.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All [ingredients] are ground in a mortar with contraction powder, sieved, and mixed with water or egg albumen, and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and separated bones from their places, and to relieve pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take wool soaked in vinegar and oil of cedar and apply it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, abscess formation, or the expulsion of pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another plaster method that restores fractured bones: take fig leaf peelings and wild opium poppy leaves; grind them all together to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the persistence of an abscess: recipe ground from chalk, camomile, violets, hops, and wild oats, all in equal parts. All [ingredients] are ground in vinegar if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then prepare it with water of colander hyssop or water and use that [preparation].\] Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a strong plaster for resolution, when an abscess lasting long occurs on the body: take radish root and its seeds, ballast nut, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, of all parts ground and crushed; all are steeped in water of savory or sweet water or vinegar, all according to the quality of the member and the relaxation of the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration, but rather a plaster made of wax and oil should be applied and no other cause; and he recommends it to be neither too thick nor too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moreover, in Gaul it is seen that they should be applied on a broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, incense and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster for wounds and pain: take poppy seeds, celery, human skin scraped or goose feathers, radish, salt, ground and sieved; make it into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moreover, the quantity that corresponds to the extent of the wound and it should be removed, consider whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is broken from its place; then do not remove for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens that the place becomes painful or swollen or inflamed, then cut or remove it at that time and apply plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the affected area until the swelling and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour; and apply wool soaked in vinegar, oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are sure of the abscess being cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and the pain of it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Also, apply gentle and small pressure to that slight constriction and do not tighten it with your first constraint, and gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And when the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation and all the symptoms have been relieved, and you need neither plaster nor bandage, then massage it as you did at the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the member, then do not remove it except after three or four or six days. And after certain intervals all of this is left for twenty days according to your observation through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh coagulates on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage in all places, and adjust the swelling of the patient's wound according to the memory of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Moreover, if you see the location of the fracture drying out and extending more than necessary, then know that nourishment should not reach it; therefore wrap it in warm water daily to prevent it from drying out; and let this be for three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, and by this operation allow the member to receive nourishment, and heal lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Those who restore the fracture of the member with other methods when it is not restored at the beginning, as necessary, and restore it incorrectly according to their operation, and have great fear, and if they were righteous, they would have increased these in their books and warned against doing it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen anyone do this, so it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital: On Fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and their causes are distinct, because some fracture is caused by striking with a weapon, which shatters all the bone into small pieces, which is called scalping; or the weapon cuts some part of the bone, but does not penetrate to the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures can be large or small, and whether it is contracted or protruded; and the cause of it is striking with a hammer or crossbow on stone, and similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating and approaches the panicle, which is adjacent to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this fracture is narrowed in the bone, in its subtlest part, and for that reason this species of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This fracture is caused by striking with a stone or impact on a stone, which causes one layer of the bone to enter into the internal layers, and it occurs in concave places such as at the joints when they are struck and split open and enter into the internal layers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And moreover, it is done in bodies made of moist bones, such as those of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	To all these kinds of dislocations and fractures, they are afflictions like separated needles.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The patient will return to its place (position).
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We must recognize all these kinds of fractures by observation on them and by inquiry into their symptoms, as well as the rotten flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A capillary type (of fracture) is recognized by what is revealed over the bone and it is cleaned, and limited in size with a probe, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, it is necessary to consider first the accidents of the patient, and afterwards examine if they indicate by obvious signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses of the throat, fainting, acute fever, swelling and redness of the affected areas, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, for it is doubted whether it will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If there are no unusual accidents, you hope for health, then you begin its treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has been afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is during the days of winter, then you must study the removal of the bone fragment before the twelfth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, you must remove the bone fragment before the seventh day, because what remains of the bone can become rotten with putrefaction, and the accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicol covering the brain, and it is divided into small pieces and adhered (stuck together), then you must incise the divided area, compressed and adherent, according to what I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	It is that you reason the patient's head afflicted, and expose (examine) over the bone according to custom and as possible for you according to the appearance of the wound, and it should be gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If it occurs to you, you must detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess, then you oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you apply warm compresses made of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be sure of blood flow; and then begin the circumcision of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that may be one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is that you incise the bone with a straight incisor and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the incisor tool that is longer than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	You must have several incisor tools of various sizes, some longer than others; and some shorter than the rest and should be at the end of sharpness of their tips, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them (the incisors) easily when striking on the instrument to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with chisels (taravels), which are called non-penetrating chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called that because they do not pierce the end of the bone to where it is near, for this reason the chisel has a rounded tip or edge over what is left of the cap of it sharp, similar to an edge or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate for you to take a large number of these splinters that each one corresponds to the specific bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull, the end of which is sharp. The quantity in length and width should be according to the size of the bone splinter.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then move the splinter to another location, and stop when it reaches a place where the splinter's size matches the length or thickness of the ray.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here is the translation: Then insert a chisel and chisels between each crack of the bone, and make a subtle incision on it at the end of levitation, as we have said, until you cut the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using various tools that you will have prepared for this purpose, such as mallets and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	You must be very careful that the chisel does not touch any of the nerves.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve if it is so, you must separate it from the nerve and extract it. You should cut and file it on the roughness of the bone with another tool similar to a chisel, but be sure that it is thinner and more delicate than other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small pieces of the bones remain and are stuck, you must take it with ease with what is appropriate from the tools at your disposal; then care for the wound with linseed oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here is the translation for this line: The other method of operation is easy and far from fear, which we call Galen's dry method, and it is highly praised; this is its explanation: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin by uncovering the fracture site where the break is most evident and visible. After you have discovered that fracture and have stopped at the place with the slow and gentle tip of the chisel, which has the following shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The round fracture is long and does not cut any nerve, while the sharp fracture has two edges advancing in length, as sometimes happens; that the round fracture should be adjusted to the nerve with the sharp edge cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the chisel with a small hammer on one side of the fracture until you have cut through the entire bone with ease as it rotates, and you are sure that no panic occurs in any way in case of accident that worries you; if the patient was very foolish and most ignorant among all men, certainly he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any nerve remains attached to the bone of the panic at certain locations on the bone, you will cut it with the round tip of the chisel and release it gently without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panic, and what is separated or remains of the bone is its face, and it remains rough and subtle indentations, you must file that roughness and remove those indentations with fine files which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places at the most convenient time and the right place for each one depending on where you find yourself in your operation of that broken bone and the shape of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	You must use reason when filing the bone at first with the least of those files, and then use the most delicate part of it, without ceasing to do so continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thin and fine parts of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in the case of other small and subtle fractures, you must care for it according to what you find for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The reason is that it is not completely understood in all aspects by those who study that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we will write about what we have shown for large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the panic is rectangular when you cut the bone, then you must take cloth in accordance with the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another cloth doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the primary cloth, and apply gentle pressure on it that you can apply without damaging the nerve; and administer a thin ointment to it, but do not press too hard on it, only as much as the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that patient in this care for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess cauterization; then separate him and administer medicines suitable for dryness, such as linen rag and oat flour, powder of figs and Aristolochia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the sore, so it becomes dry; and in general, administer to him all medicine with properties that absorb and do not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Be careful that the sore in your care is clean; it should not be covered with grease or anything else; nor let it fester; for when it becomes infected in the brain tissue, it corrupts it and poisons the patient, and leads to a great evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When the skull is opened, as the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is prolonged, and it becomes black on the surface; therefore consider whether the patient has experienced the accidents that we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If the blackness does not come from the medicine applied, but is due to the properties of that medicine, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil. Take a linen cloth and lay it over the skull; place a poultice of appropriate healing herbs on top of it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two halves as it is sometimes mistakenly thought, but one of them is slightly displaced or observed, because in it there are two bones, and the break is not complete, but rather a dislocation, twisting and narrowing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two halves of it is broken, you must insert your little finger into its nose and guide the fracture inward with your other finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Make it as easy for you as possible, and be careful that your operation does not harm the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the superior half of the nose and the lower one does not project, then you must equalize it with the end of the bone that is slightly thickened.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in both halves, then you do the same.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Gather all the necessary materials for its repair on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, wait until the seventh or tenth day for the abscess to heal.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one half, or two calques (small pieces), if the fracture is in both halves, and make it as thick as it fills the hollow of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	As the old restorers say, the calques should be sewn with thread and kept in place all day, but I don't find it so; nevertheless, the cloth must be folded in albumen of coagulated egg white with powdered flour and placed inside until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, it may be better to put something inside the nose instead of a calque, such as a piece of lion's skin, if there is excessive bleeding; and if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not forbidden from breathing through it.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This procedure is not necessary for you; if you want, do it, and if you want, use calques.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If there is another abscess that needs healing, fill the nose with wax or a mixture of honey and rose oil or balm, or alum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no abscess that needs healing, you must fill it from outside with oat flour and powdered figs mixed with egg white; and place a piece of lion's skin over it, but do not let the nose touch anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, you must break it further and extract them with the appropriate instruments; then sew up the opening, heal it with what strengthens and consolidates, and use plasters that are suitable for healing.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a sore inside the nose, you must heal it with calques and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jawbone is broken and the fracture is not in a sore, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside, not split into two and curved towards the inside, then its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger into their mouth; and push the curvature of the fracture towards the inside with ease at the inside parts, with your other hand pushing the outside part of the bone; do this gently.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two, then it's necessary to administer extension of both parts according to right angle until the alignment can be achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is a fracture or dislocation of the teeth, take care to set those that can be saved with gold, silver, or ivory splints; then place cotton on the broken jawbone and also double layer of linen cloth, and a thick plaster well made or a single piece of gauze along the length of the jawbone; bind them as appropriate according to the fracture type and necessary application until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Order the patient to rest and take only mild food, avoid sour lemons.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, wait until the third day and then examine it; correct what is already altered with powder of milled pearl, albumen of egg white or flour of chalk, because you will remove the cotton from it, and place lamb wool on the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Then leave the plaster attached to it, and if the bone arrangement is not altered, let it be, until it heals and strengthens the fracture; because this fracture usually heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another pus-filled boil occurs, administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the boil is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is a wound, consider whether it is separated flesh or an ulcer; in this case, carefully separate those tissues with the appropriate tool for removing them with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound of the ulcer is narrow, expand it with a trocar according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have removed those tissues and they are not reabsorbed, close the wound if it is large; otherwise, cover it with one of the appropriate dressings and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	In three ways, the collarbone can be broken at its juncture with muscles; and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts other than those that become ulcers; and it is easier to treat the former; or it occurs in such a way with ulcers, and it is difficult to treat the latter; or it is like when the fracture occurs with an open wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation when the fracture occurs without an open wound is that you must have two assistants present; one to hold the broken collarbone and another to extend the neck in the affected area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the teeth mentioned earlier until the proper shape is achieved without excess protrusion or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, it's necessary to place a pillow or wool beneath the patient's back and adjust its size according to your need; then extend and elevate the collarbone and hold it in place with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you are unable to insert the extremity of the collarbone into its proper position outside, because it is inaccessible due to a previous incision, then the patient should be repositioned on their back, and a small cushion placed on the affected muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant should press the muscle at the fracture site until the collarbone is elevated so that it aligns with the incision above; then you must correct the fracture and align it with the teeth mentioned earlier.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if there are ulcers on the collarbone and they are bad, it's necessary to make an incision over that area and remove those ulcers with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, you should make an incision into it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this purpose, after placing the chisel that serves as a lever below the collarbone; and the chisel has a shaft or iron in the shape of:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is like the cupler (hollow part) of which this is the concavity; and let its width be as required for it, according to what you have needed for it, according to the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length should be as far as is possible for the operation; it must have two ends in this way, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the tear of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the pus from the bone is wide and it appears to be an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the tear is small or you fear abscess, then you fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If abscess occurs, then you insert linen in strong vinegar and rose oil and wait on it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But if the bone is without wound and without opening, you place a plaster made of flour with egg white on it and stop it with leon skin (leopard skin), and place your finger near it, if necessary, and take emetic (emetic is a substance that causes vomiting) which is called "the turban of the Saracens," which is long and its width should be about one palm or more; and you place powder twice on the stopper and the plaster; and you take a thin table-steel rod whose thickness should be three fingers, and wrap it in cloth, and wrap that cloth around the rod in the location of the fracture; and you place emetic (in this case, revol means to make the emetic into a paste) on it and turn it over the neck of it and near the neck of the patient, and move it back and forth and near the neck of the patient, and reduce it on all sides, and when the stricture of the fracture and the swelling descend, and it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in all, the splint should not be harmful to the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, because when the limb is softened or the splint has been removed, then you correct it and strengthen the fracture.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	You place the patient's head on their neck and let them sleep slightly inclined from that side; so that with this, the support of the limb from that side is elevated, and thus the fracture of the vertebra is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arms are attached to the neck of it.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the limb unless abscess occurs in the location or there is pressure, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And you renew the plaster if you have seen its face and adjust it in the stricture and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the vertebra is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it should be strengthened and supported for twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in the month of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at the lateral location, but not completely broken, only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, when the location of it is broken - and it is broken in the middle location - and it is not known except by touching, then you prepare it according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it according to its natural figure in all ways possible with any means at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And you place powder of flour with egg white and leopard skin, and you place double powder of cloth, and you place a thin table-steel rod on it according to the size of the spatula or more if necessary.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the rod is concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with leopard skin, and you adjust the rod according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen it from above with a long emetic with appropriate constriction and the firmness of the rod until it is removed from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the limb every day; and every time it softens, the next day you strengthen it equally and adjust the rod if it has been removed from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in twenty or thirty days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore, when this number is completed, then you loosen the limb, and you know for sure that it is of the bones from which the fracture did not begin or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if there is pressure in the bone location and you place a bandage, then you make an incision on it, and remove it, and do as previously described in the vertebra fracture to avoid abscess danger if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of foot fractures.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle location, but the ends of it move towards each other, but they are swollen and bruised.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone of him who is fractured breaks apart, it descends into parts inside and happens that he experiences great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and it is revealed in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; press firmly on the muscles of him, and adjust his ribs with both hands, be subtle in the operation of him, and in the alignment according to all means possible and necessary, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place a plaster and a stopper on it, and lay a thin strip of willow or caligy wood with similar properties on top of it, because you cover him with cloth; be subtle in tying that one over the fractured bone so that it is not too tight; and go along with the curvature of his back some times, and tighten it appropriately; consider the tie at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessity causes the plaster to come off, you must corrode or burn it, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the location, then you cut and remove it and remove the plaster and correct what happens due to it with a method of treatment for him; and return the plaster, if necessary, to its place; and adjust its tie until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not happen in thin places that follow the spine; and from the ends of them on the front side it is not contracted except by what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this should not be hidden from sensation, the investigation of it should be done with the aforementioned signs.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that the fracture is closed with the aforementioned methods, until it is healed as necessary, and place plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint if it is required.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs descends into parts inside, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture, as in puncture that occurs in someone who has wept, and because the bones are covered with linen; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were skillful in that with many clever methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And that which they said is: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that generates inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen is inflated and expanded, and the fracture is forced outward to the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should beware of this, so that it does not cause the creation of an abscess cautiously, if not necessary; and if it happens, then help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be stopped above the bladder and that it should be squeezed out forcefully; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the bladder attracts excess to the location due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: it should be covered with linen that is already immersed in hot oil, and pulverized material between the ribs until it is filled, let the tie be tight when you cover it according to the curvature; and cure the patient with treatment for pleurisy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if intense constriction causes suffering for the patient that cannot tolerate it, and the bones are pierced with a linen cloth with puncture, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location, uncover the broken rib, and place an instrument over it that preserves the cipher, the memory of which was mentioned earlier, and cut the bone with ease and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And place both lips of the wound together, if it is large, with sutures, and heal it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then you cut and pour hot water into it and place plasters over the location, and cure the patient with what is necessary for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And lie on a board over which he sleeps until healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and later they contract, similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider, because if his muscles are already softened and swollen and dead and cannot be made to grow or strengthen, and when you tighten them with the aforementioned ties or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain there, then you know that it is not healed, and in the month of preparation it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel constriction and pain with the ties and piercing in those, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck that resemble this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the weight of it.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has become softened, go to those who have occurred in the thighs, and approach when he lies on his back, there is ventosity and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is reclined on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point do not work on the healing of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no such cause occurs in this case, the cause is better and easier to handle.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for him is to perform the cautery of the abscess that you place over the swollen vertebra or oiled with oil, or with honey applied; place it over that for several days until the abscess is cured.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it there with liniment; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the fracture of the bone occurs or any other cause that has already been separated from him, then you must cauterize the skin over the wound and open the bone; and align the two lips of the wound, with suturing if it is large; and care for it with a dressing made of grease until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If it is broken at the end of the bone in the heel, and that is the end of the tendon, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and grasp the fractured bone with the other hand as possible by equal measure; and place a dressing and splint over it if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel fractures in it (the bone), then cut it open and remove it, and care for the wound with a treatment that is preceded until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the repair of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken and if they break, the fracture is not only communicated to the extremities of these bones but they are inserted in length and decline into the sides; and pain occurs in that area and a lump forms when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the repair of it (the anus) is that you extend your hand over it to the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at its extremity, you grasp it as you are able to grasp it in accordance with the equality of grasping something that is similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or that declines into the sides of the anus, then you make the patient lie on his stomach until you are prepared to repair the fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Therefore when you have grasped it (the bone), place a dressing over it, and also place the splint of wood or skin on it, and strengthen it with suturing, without fear of the fracture being punctured or the removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Grasp the concavity with whatever you fill it until it is held by the suturing according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or his right side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, you cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is cured, and place on it what you use to soothe it according to what has been done before; and return to its repair and strengthen it as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are fractured or shattered, you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the repair of the fracture of the adductor (muscle).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is that which is between the thigh to the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the repair of it (the adductor muscle) is one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat splint of medium thickness in this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be attached to two extremities with liniment, and let it be suspended from a raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The patient follows on a stretcher; and let him throw his broken arm over the pole to the tilting block in the middle location where it is attached to the curve of the pole.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And support it with some serious cause, or else the minister extends it to the sides; and the doctor who has set the fracture should hold it with his hands until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Another method is that the patient is laid back on their neck and their hand is supported at the neck; and command two servants, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other to hold the foot below it; and each extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be more forceful, then you press strongly on the fracture with both hands and on the other side with another hand, and each servant extends to their two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it should be stopped halfway at the shin and the other side of the fracture must be tied.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, it should be stopped at that location and also at the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap it gently with ease and without much effort, and when it is properly tied according to the situation and applied well, then press it if there is not an abscess formation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an abscess cautery, leave the wrapping for up to seven days and press on it with a wool suture dipped in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess recedes, then press it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of pressing the fracture is to apply a plaster on it and wrap a seaweed cloth around the plaster; and adjust the arm in a splint, and place your wet hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and press on the splint to keep the arm in its place, unless there is any reason due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use of splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that you place the broadest and strongest splint over the fracture; and place a space between each splint the width of the finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And press on the splints as previously mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your wrapping over the location of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as the fracture becomes longer, the wrapping should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if the situation of the splints and wrapping is as previously mentioned when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is a fear of abscess cautery, leave the wrapping and splints for up to seven days as previously mentioned.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent pus or inflammation in that location, or if food is not allowed to reach the limb due to excessive wrapping; and therefore correct everything as previously mentioned.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that there will be no complication of this, do not remove the ligature until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient's bed should be on their side and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And wrap the cooked arm full of wool padding, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be unbound or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct everything with your judgment.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And restrict the patient's food as previously ordered, so that it is initially subtle until it starts to thicken, and then it must be made coarser.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the splint and leg rest is that they should be strong for forty days, and then they must be loosened and a bath given and medicine applied with enema, which will correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid flat, do not loosen the ligament and splint for up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm consists of two bones that are called the two focils; the smaller one is the one we call the head, and the larger one is the one that is placed below the smaller one, from the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it can be broken only the major focal or the minor one, and they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small focal is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large focal is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to, wait a slight extension with ease until it is wrapped.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large focal is the broken one, then it is necessary to wait for a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both focals are broken together, then you must wait for the setting with less force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	It is necessary to wait for the figure of the hand in order to restore it and extend it on a cushion; the wrist should be at the sides above, as all the others have said, and the thumb should be below the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let a servant be in front of the patient at his head or feet, so that the patient does not tire.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then let another servant extend his arm from the opposite side and hold him, and let another minister do the same.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then let the doctor insert his finger into the bone to reduce it as best he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If there is a fracture of the bone, then you must try to reduce it all by your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there is a separate fracture that cannot be healed and you do not expect recovery, then cut it off as we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is infected, you have already read about that in a separate chapter, and therefore take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess arises at the beginning of your treatment, you must line a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax that is medium in thickness and strong on one side with fine suture thread to contain the abscess; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered milled chalk and clay of huou, and place needles nearby; and let it be the needle which is held over the fracture tightly and firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of needles in the arm is usually in major arrangements, or if the fracture is in a socket or in two sockets together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your suture over the location of the fracture as firmly and as strongly as possible, and when it is extracted at the parts above or below the fracture, loosen the suture slightly, according to the reminder given at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or coarse; and the thread with which it is sewn should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and let it rest for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which rectification is necessary, such as swelling of the member, then you must bind the member with a cold water poultice until it stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Release the bandage and allow the member to rest, then tighten the suture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has been softened and the bone has healed and appears like those, then you must correct everything as best you can.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging, for then you must loosen it slightly and allow it to run for several days until it reaches the nutrient, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any of the aforementioned causes, then it is not necessary to undo the bandage for more than about twenty days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of moving in an agitated manner, and have him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty days, or a little faster in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complexion and the virtues.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the treatment of a fracture in the little finger or fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the little finger and joints of the fingers there can be a fracture, but this does not usually happen unless it is injured by strong movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or injury in the hand, then you must have the patient hang down with his arms stretched out and place his hand on top of it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then let another servant extend the broken bones and the doctor insert them back into place with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you must place plaster and stop it if there is not an abscess, and place needles on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the break is in the inner part of the palm, then you must make a sling-like bandage and command the patient to hold it with his hand in a closed position; let it be strong with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the needle of the heart should be made of cloth with light material, to ensure that it is applied to the palm; and tighten it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the outer part, you must place needles on top and another needle at the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and tighten the suture as needed. The hand should be turned to the ratchet between the fingers with padding.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, insert and tighten it as needed and hold it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight needle under it to raise the fracture and prevent it from going down.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then insert and align it with the digit that is next to it; or all of them together, which is better; or place a small needle on top, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your treatment, arrange carefully the position of the cauterized abscess and oppose it – with its own operation – whatever occurs due to any cause of that, as is repeated in the narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Treatment of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The fractured bone of the thigh, when observed, is broken and is diagnosed by sensation according to whether it moves or is covered in pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that a strong ligament is placed over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the ligament to its separation according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is in the region of the thigh, then the ligament should be near the back at the separation of the adductor muscles, so that the extension fits above it, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is near the back, then make the ligament near the buttock and extend it to the separation below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor presses the bone with both his hands inside it as much as he can reduce it according to its natural shape and the bone is joined well by a good union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless the member has an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs, then leave it for several days until the abscess is drained, and return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be wrapped in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the leg to reach the ankle and the region of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long splint between the thigh and the leg near the back at the separation below, and the ends of the splint should reach the area above the wound on both sides; then turn it around the leg and thigh so that any excess of the bandage is covered.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place a cushion on the thigh at the location of the fracture splint, and place another wooden pin over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the hollow between the leg and thigh with soft cloth, so that the hematoma is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you approach the ligament near the fracture, your bandage should be less tight and more elastic and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the splint to both ends below to reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten both the ends of the pins on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Approach the structure over that which is so that it does not affect the member with corrosion or abscess, cautery or inflammation and resembles those; and if any cause of these occurs, then you must dissect it from there, and correct everything that has happened appropriately, as many observed.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is pain in the bone that grinds it down, then you must hold it as possible for you; and if not, make a splint over it and remove the affected part, and heal with what was described earlier until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some fractures of the thigh are strengthened by this which are adjusted to the splints, just as it was said in the adjunct and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a manner does not happen to the patient with limping; and if it is restored alone, another part that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary for the one from whom this always limps.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months, or a few weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of complications and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the heel bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the heel bone takes a long time to heal, but it happens many times with delayed healing.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there is a fracture, then it is not only fissure or crack in its parts, and this is with a wound or without wounds, and all this is with the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of it is such that the broken parts are held together with what was described until they are united and joined as much as is possible by alignment, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place a plaster and a pad over the rounded stem if needed; strengthen it with a splint appropriate for that purpose.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that were recommended in other fractures, such as abscess and similar ones that oppose all accidents with what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh bone there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called by the name of the thigh; and the other is small, and it is called the femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if any of the types of fracture occurs in two bones of the arm, and it is done by restoring the arm as described, and the operation on it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If the bones are fractured together, the thigh bone is broken in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the small bone is fractured, the thigh bone is converted into many pieces in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is fractured, break it below, and this is due to causes that are not known to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And provide extension, alignment, and ligature of the tendons according to the restoration described.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the thigh bone is shallow and has few setbacks, then the extension should be less and lighter, and ease with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh bone there is some cause of operation on the arm, and this is when you hold the splints and complete all the operations described, then you will take pieces of wood from pine which are placed under the causes that have been placed on a shelf, and these are made exactly as branches of palm; align them according to the small curvature, and they should not be too heavy for the hands, and the length of these according to the length of the thigh bone, and from the heel to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap each one with fabric in two layers according to its length, and place one over the fracture of the thigh bone on one side, and the other over the fracture of the other side, from the heel to the sole of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And align the two splints in three locations at both ends, and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh bone is prohibited from bending on one side or the other, and it stands well.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace made of wood according to the length of the thigh bone is administered; it should be placed under the thigh to prevent movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Furthermore, you must do this in a fracture, and when with that it is truly a wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in each day the thigh bone and study it with more care, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of these occurs, then you must oppose it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture does not occur in the whole ankle; but in the bones of the foot it happens occasionally; and in the toes of the foot, few occur fractures, and these do not happen unless there is injury in the arrangement of position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes these bones are elevated between them, then place the patient's foot on the ground prepared in this way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Approximate one foot on what is raised by those bones, approximate there, press, and guide it back into its place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Approximate a plaster and stopper on top of it, and place a small table under the foot, with two handles that can be adjusted.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Approach the limb with a descending structure (such as a splint or bandage) around it, since you have wrapped it with cloth and for other reasons that are necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days have passed, you must remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is thus necessary.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if the bones are fractured, you must restore them and guide them back into place as I have shown you and as I recommend to you in the treatment of hands.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Approximate the fractured finger with the length of the finger, and place it slightly oblique to it; and place under the foot this table which I have recommended to you, and hold it with a descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the fracture of the bones is two or three or more, you must place a splint on each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and hold the table under the heel of the foot, and stand on one of the handles of the table away from the belly of the foot to ensure good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is appropriate for you to remember that you must consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in other fractures, and be prepared for any eventuality.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the neck of the woman and the pelvis bone and the coccyx of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is fractured, you must let it rest in a horizontal position, and incline it slightly to one side, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the neck of the bed with cotton and places it in this manner; and the woman is shaken, and gradually raises her legs a little, because everything will be forgotten in front of the neck until it is in the correct position and the fractured bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place some pillows under the legs, and when she wants to urinate, move the bed with ease, and empty it and return it to its original position as described in the beginning, and bring back the first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or more, because it will heal.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take an ovine bladder and place it over the crack with a reed cannula; insert the entire bladder into the neck of the bone, and inflate the cannula with air inside until the bladder is filled with the bone, because the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the pelvis bone of a man or woman is fractured, you must administer for its restoration and treatment what I have recommended in the treatment of the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	What is correct should not be hidden in these close fractures and what little it may be, especially for the one who has some study and experience and understands my words; because that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions via righteousness in its restoration and in its treatment, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the coccyx of the man when it is fractured, take a walnut shell, and place the coccyx inside it; and place it on a cloth covering, wrap it, and let it rest for three days or more, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capital XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when they are ulcerated.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for the one who suffers from a fracture with an ulcer, and especially if the bone is large such as the hip or humerus, or similar to it, that you cauterize and probe it immediately if the conditions of cauterization are present as described above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the ulcer exudes pus, you must ensure its retention until you apply powdered tertian antimony to it if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin the restoration of the fracture on that day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, you must leave the restoration of it for nine days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, because you will cause harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is prominent on the skin surface, you must ensure that you perforate it and guide it back with your hands and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the situation of it with your hands, you must reduce it with this tool; and the tool that should be made of iron, its length should be seven or eight inches, and its width according to the size of the ulcer; and the physician should take three or four of these depending on the amount required for treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it be slightly dirty so that it is not doubled over during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have a pointed end with a margin at its edges; let the thickness of it be increasing towards the top and from the base to the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, which means a slightly curved spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, it must be placed on top of the bone's protruding extremity and held stationary.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that area until the bone returns and is held with some pressure.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore, apply pressure to the fracture's extremities, and if the broken extremity is thin, do not use the instrument well because of good reason, then you must bore into that bone until the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then bore it with what is appropriate for the borers that we have mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth that which remains in the bone with roughness and small cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels intense pain returning, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural location; therefore, do what is necessary for the patient's great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, and then immerse linen in black stiff vinegar, and if it's summer, do not put oil on the wound or any other cause where there might be oil, to prevent pus and rot from occurring.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And apply needles at the time of your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you bore it with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be careful not to press the wound with the fracture, because many times foolish doctors have done such things, and it has caused death or severe illness in their patients, which is a great sin.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your ligature is light, soft, different from the ligatures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any of the bad accidents that we have recommended, and pain occurs in the area, then it is not necessary to press on the needles, but apply a hard bandage where the needles are and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins after one or two days, which is a sign of putrefaction, you must remove the linen that you had placed over it with vinegar, and then apply warm compresses, anoint them with balms, as our custom is to treat wounds, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the ligament and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and it must be prepared in such a way that the pus runs from the site to the parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound lasts for many days without being consolidated or abscessed from the putrefaction, then you know that here are the signs of gangrene, and therefore you must examine the wound with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from these signs, those that separate and are extracted, those that do not separate and make the member swell and cause pain, you must bore them as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If pus or corruption occurs in the wound, it is staphylococcus or another form of decay and putrefaction, then you must press on one of those with what is appropriate for the treatment of that disease as described in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that, the most important thing and you should present your case: when a large bone is broken, elevate the limb in such a way as the bones of the thigh and hip and similar ones of the large members, and do not presume attraction or extraction because many times it leads to death; leave it inside for as long as possible, because strong leeches may fall from it on their own within 20 to 30 days. Treat the wound if it has been observed by you, and do not leave it unattended.
Capitol .xx.	The Capitulum XX (Chapter 20) begins here:
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knots that occur in the wound of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Knots often occur in the wound of healing from a fracture, and particularly near joints, and are caused by the swelling of the limb; and it greatly hinders the movement of the limb in its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider whether the knot is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and enses, and mira, and similar substances; take some or all of these, and bind them with linen, or albumen of egg, or vinegar, and place it on the knot in a compress, and bind it firmly with good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the extraction alone for several days; then loosen it and apply another one until the knot is gone; or strengthen on top of that a lead plate firmly, because lead has the property of keeping anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already become hard and tight and is causing a constant pain, cut it through the most superficial part, and remove the excess or pierce it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and heal that until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	The Capitulum XXI (Chapter 21) begins here:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they have been restored and the limb is held in position according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb is held in position, it should not be done except for several reasons: one of which is excessive use of solutions of lime and lack of proper binding; or excess tightness of the bindings before the nutriment is prohibited from running to the limb; or excessive swelling of the bandages; or superfluous movement not at its time; or scanty blood in the body of the patient and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And treatment for this is to give the patient food and make his heart tender until the blood is multiplied in him; administer a bath, and apply oil and comfort on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster attracts little nourishment, or continuous swelling of the limb with hot water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	The Capitulum XXII (Chapter 22) begins here:
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones that are restored incorrectly and prevent the operation of them as required.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When there is a problem with the limb that has been restored already in healing from curvature and prominence of the fractured bone and knots, it is because the shape of the limb is distorted, but nevertheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary for you to receive the word of the one who claims that the limb was newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear of the punishment of which death is the penalty.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limpness and knots are recent, then it is necessary to swaddle them with hot water in which soft herbs that soothe are placed, such as althea leaves and radishes, melilot, and similar substances; and make a compress with mollifying plasters such as diallaquilon well made, or take mucilage from althea roots and mix it with gray of gauline or olive oil, and apply it, or prepare figs rich in oil and grated with the fat of pigeon, and similar substances of medicines that are called ameliorating consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes it is dissolved by persistent, gentle friction that is applied to the moistest areas, and movement of the member should be administered all around at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Sometimes it is necessary to cut through the swelling strongly and convert it into stone for treatment, then the pus above must be drained and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and whatever excess of hardness from that meat should be removed with fine cutters, and ease should be administered in that area with solicitude and care.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital. xxiii. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-third chapter of the text.)
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially one of the joints' locations where movement is restricted, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing pain and serious injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when there is a dislocation, it must be treated immediately by reduction, and the reduction should not be delayed, for if it is delayed, the location becomes necrotic and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not good nor advisable to perform the amputation during the necrotic phase, for many times it causes spasms and painful contractions.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when necrosis occurs, it is necessary to perform the amputation on the patient, and let it rest before removing the necrotic tissue; then the member should be embalmed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire member must be treated with a substance that will bring about healing at its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And it has been divided into chapters on dislocation as was done with fractures; from the upper to lower parts of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capital. xxiv. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-fourth chapter of the text.)
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, lower.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated, it should not be delayed; and a dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are reduced back to their locations with little movement, and are softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and displaced, until they are softened at the juncture and the patient's saliva flows out and cannot be held nor can they close their mouth, and their tongue is swollen in its socket.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, then it can be reduced with fewer measures.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced gently and without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the attendant should hold the patient's head, and enter their thumb into the affected side of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others should be outside to support it; and tell the patient to stop moving their jaws and hold them apart from each other; and the doctor will gently guide the jaw back into its location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer embalming with warm water and oil until it becomes easier to reduce both, and do not delay the reduction of both, as was said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and closed, and the patient's mouth is not yet softened, place powdered cloth on them with wax and oil, and make a paste of wax and warm oil; and let it be applied gently and gradually.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient rest on their back, with their head between two pillows to prevent them from turning to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything; allow them a leon-like diet until the pain subsides and the jaws are healed, then administer whatever they desire.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be done gently, and avoid forcing the opening of the mouth due to eating, drinking, speaking, and chewing, until the jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not converted back to their locations, it often leads to fevers and constant sweating, and severe weakness occurs in the patient's abdomen, and violent, pure vomiting follows.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you should know that it is a disaster; and many times the patient dies within ten days of experiencing this.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital. xxv. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-fifth chapter of the text.)
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the base through its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer edge, and this can be confirmed by palpation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him/her (the patient) is that he/she walks on his/her own two feet and extends his/her arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return (the intestine or hernia).
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a cushion over that plaster and pound it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity that is cut off and joined together is not dislocated in any day, then it must be reduced and sutured as you have said and as you are equipped for.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cushion over that plaster, pound it, cut through the flesh, and order the patient to rest and remain still until he/she is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	This sentence seems to continue the previous discussion about surgical procedures, specifically about reducing (repositioning) an extremity that was separated from its location. It may refer to a procedure where a limb or body part was amputated and then reattached, or possibly a dislocated bone that was realigned. The text seems to describe the process of reducing the extremity in order to correct its position.
Capitol .xxvi.	This appears to be a chapter heading (capitulum) in the treatise, numbered as chapter 26. It is common for medieval medical texts to be organized into chapters, each dealing with a specific topic or procedure. The exact content of this chapter cannot be determined from the given text.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	This seems to continue the discussion about reducing (repositioning) an extremity or body part that was separated or dislocated, as previously mentioned in the previous sentences. The term "dislocacio" in this context likely refers to a dislocation of a bone or joint. The text may discuss specific techniques for reducing a dislocated joint, such as manipulation or traction, or surgical interventions for reattaching an amputated limb or body part. The exact content of this chapter cannot be determined from the given text.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that a limb or body part (muscle) can be dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the joint where it meets another bone. This implies that the text is discussing the various types and causes of dislocations, and possibly different methods for treating them depending on their location. It may also provide information about the symptoms, signs, and potential complications associated with each type of dislocation.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way is that it (the limb or body part) can be dislocated at the joint above the muscle, and this is often the case; it is not dislocated at the joints behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated at the joints in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Furthermore, a limb or body part (muscle) can be dislocated and extend beyond the joint at the back, but this occurs more often in those with thin skin; however, it is difficult to extend beyond the joint in muscles with thicker skin.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	A heavy blow or accident can occur in some men, causing an abscess (apostema) on the muscle of that person; and it must be drained with a cautery and treated once it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you must first assess whether you are equipped for the procedure and then proceed with the treatment of it (the injury or condition).
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation at the back joint where it meets another bone is known; therefore, you should distinguish between a dislocated limb or body part and an intact one, because there are clear differences among them; and you must feel for the concavity at the head of the muscle (the end of the bone), and at the back joint of the bone, you must touch the head of the muscle in such a way that it feels like touching the heel of a shoe. Furthermore, the patient is unable to reduce his/her hand to his/her elbow, or to move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a dislocation of the foot or ankle, you should feel for clear indications and not miss them.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And with this type of dislocation, reduction is made easily when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction is that the servant raises the patient's arm above the armpits; and he presses the affected joint downwards, lifting the joint with force towards its own location, the servant raises the patient's arm, and extends it thus; and he presses it downwards so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return as a result of what has been said, and is due to the beginning of dislocation, many days later, then the patient must be bathed in hot water and given an ointment that softens and soothes like if it were a burn from aloe, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and it must be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The patient should be positioned on his back and his affected joint should be pressed downwards with moderate pressure, awaiting the arrival of wool that is between softness and tightness, and the doctor should press his heel on the sphere (joint), lifting the muscle with force, pulling the patient's arm away from the opposite side to prevent it from becoming swollen, and another servant should hold the patient's head so that it does not become swollen at the opposite side, as the joint will soon return to its own location.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want to do this, reduce the joint in the following way: and it is that you bring a man who is longer than the patient, from the side of that part, intertwine his muscle with the affected joint and lift the affected joint towards the armpits until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the patient's arm away from the opposite side of the abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lightweight, it is necessary that something else be suspended, to weigh it down, as the dislocation will soon return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The joint is reduced in another way: and it is that it be placed on the ground, a long post with its head round, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, should be placed near the patient; then you place cloths over the head of the post, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and extend the patient's arm towards the opposite side; and the other part is extended with force, as the joint returns quickly to its own location.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction of the joint is difficult due to all the causes mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a post whose length is two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness should be reduced at the end of the pestle in the following way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place cloths over the round head of the post, to prevent the post from hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the affected joint near the post and extend the arm or shoulder over the post towards the opposite side, and tie the post around the arm, shoulder, and end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place the arm on a step of the stairs according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, and suspend the other body part from the opposite side, as the joint will soon be restored.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for reducing the joint is complete in any way that is possible to you, then you should press downwards on the affected joint with wool of a suitable size; and apply a plaster prepared with powder of molasses and egg white over the entire muscle, so that it is rolled up above, and tighten the affected joint with moderate pressure; and allow the linen to be rolled onto the plaster, and bind the arm to the neck, leaving it loose, and do not let the arm swell for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary that the food of the patient be sparse, until the member is comfortable, as it is easier for healing to occur.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And approach food should be given more slowly within seven or five days and exercise the affected member; and if it is firm and not softened, then it has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated for more than seven days due to moisture or other cause, then it is necessary that a cauterization with three cuts be administered in it, as it was said earlier in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all of the above is done and the binding and joint are not closed within seven days, and the plaster and tightening are removed from it after some days, and it remains loose, swollen, and cannot lift the arm towards the armpits above, then you should know that the nerves in it (the muscle) are injured or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed back in its own location.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of the dislocation on the feet and the heel or the buttocks is done by pushing and extending with force until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply another tightening to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if gravity and slowness in the movement of the member occur during healing, then the patient should bathe it for many days until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Treatise on the treatment of shoulder dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is difficult to treat and has a similar return; and when it is dislocated in all parts, particularly in front or behind, the dislocation of this part is not hidden, since the shoulder may be displaced by falling or hitting in any way, depending on its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the affected arm, that is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot fold the arm, nor can it touch the corresponding muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to catch the shoulder and reduce the dislocation immediately in front where there is an evident swelling, for if it comes to a visible swelling, the reduction of this becomes difficult, and complete healing is not easy; and especially when it is at the back part, because all other types of dislocation are worse than this one, and it causes more pain, and many times this condition leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of the shoulder, when possible, is that the arm of it should be extended with two hands, and the shoulder should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of his hands towards its original place, or with a rod in the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front part, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, and striking the shoulder with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two servants should extend the arm, while another two hold it in place to prevent it from going back during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn the arm around in all directions, since it is wrapped with long cloth or bandages around its hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint; and then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Before the reduction of this joint, it should be stopped on a poultice that has astringent and healing properties with egg white, and it should be pressed with a tight bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then unwrap it; and if the joint is formed in its place, you should remove the bandage from there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not strengthened, you should apply another poultice and bandage for several days until it is tightened; and then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is a risk of complications in the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, you should apply humectation in bathing and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place an oil-soaked cloth on the affected joint (something greasy); and tie it around the bone, leaving it for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove the oil-soaked cloth and put it in a bath; when it dries, you should rub the joint with warm friction, and apply a warming poultice to it three times a day, the first time, the second time, and the third time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has occurred within the intestine, so it should be bound with a bandage until it is healed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide poultice over the wound with plaster and pressure on it; do this several times, because it is moist and reduces it to its original position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the arm-shoulder joint.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed in reducing it at the time of dislocation is essential before the location becomes swollen or there is a visible swelling.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder on a table and have the servant extend the arm of the patient; then, the doctor places his hand or palm near the joint and pushes it forcefully until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is essential to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen; in this case, the patient should place his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding (precedent), you should position the hand of the affected side intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be placed on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, you should strengthen it with a poultice allowing the swelling to subside and leave it; do not rub it, because it may not bear or endure on the reduction of this joint for more than several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint remains crooked in its shape; and you should not inform the patient of any cause, but only soften the arm so that it cannot strengthen any cause; in this case, you should know that the nerves are broken or severed, and you should not tamper with it unless it is tightened with a hot cautery to prevent further damage.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the patient has recovered, place a plaster on it that we have recommended, let it rest and strengthen for five days; then remove it, let it rest again and exercise the affected hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the condition of the area worsens and there is any serious complication, then soften it with warm water and massage it for several days until it improves.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the fingers are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or the back of it, stretch the finger and push on the dislocation until it returns to its normal position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the knuckle of the finger and suspend the affected part from it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is properly aligned on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, follow this procedure, and do not remove the bandage during the day but exercise it with movement, and do so at night; continue this for several days until it becomes firm.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand; align it with that part and perform the first treatment until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Perform the same procedure when it is dislocated in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine (specifically the vertebrae).
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When one of the vertebrae of the back or neck is completely dislocated and several vertebrae are moved from their places, then there is no treatment for it, because death is imminent for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this condition is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot hold it in; several members of the body or two legs or one arm, or a vertebra, are softened or dislocated in four places because several vertebrae are dislocated and several are moved.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been dislocated in the rear parts and is called scoliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment of scoliosis depends on whether it occurs in childhood, as there is no treatment for it or cure in that case.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in cases of scoliosis resulting from accident, injury, or similar causes, the ancient writers have described various treatment methods at length, the most effective of which will be discussed here; however, due to the brevity required for this presentation, I will summarize it and provide an explanation of the essential principles using instruments that will be explained and illustrated.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in scoliosis occurring in the lower back, there is neither treatment nor healing for it; and similarly with one that occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Only scoliosis occurring in the upper back can be treated with the method I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient should lie face down with the affected area near a wall and be extended slightly away from the wall to avoid putting pressure on the feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A straight stick should be placed under the head with its tip in the ground near the patient's feet, and another stick should be used to lift the feet on the other end of the plank.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The operator should hold the stick and it should not be fixed in a hole; another assistant should hold the other end as described above.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Wrap the head of the patient with a cloth and then pull on the string firmly; extend the end of the string to the stick that is under the patient's head, and hold it there; then tighten the other string around the patient's hips and shoulders, and hold the chest and feet; finally, adjust all the strings and hold them on the other stick.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The operator should then extend the string to the other stick and ensure that neither stick nor the strings attached to their respective locations are moved, but they should not be fixed in place as previously mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor should place his hands on the affected vertebra with force until it returns to its normal position, or he should place a table under it and adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its normal position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return to its normal position in this manner, then take a table that is one and a half cubits long or wide (or both) and carve a hole in the wall near the patient's head into which you can insert the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the mattress of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and press strongly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you want, turn the body that is turned towards your hand; and it is that you place your feet on the head of the patient at the end of his fists, whose length should be one arm's length, and place the head of him in the same way two fists away from your feet; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and make a hole in each fist through which the body passes, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not bad.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Make a fist around the area where the turn is, and roll it between the two holes made in each fist.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	At the end of him is a hole through which the fist is formed, whose length is one palm in diameter as it is rolled; and the other two fists are similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then pull the ligaments that you have tied around the patient's feet in the hole that is to be his head, and the ligaments that you have tied around his thighs in the hole that is to be his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then place each body part and have a servant turn it with his hand, and the doctor guides the spine as previously stated.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the body part:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Once the spine has returned and the area is closed, it is necessary to apply a healing paste made of albumen of eggs and stopper; and place a wooden stick over the paste, whose width should be three fingers or slightly more than that, and the length should take up the area of the swelling, and above the division of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then use the ligament we mentioned for nutrition until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there remains any danger in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth by long-term administration of a table, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been applied in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes danger can occur in the end of the spines of the back, and it is due to dislocation; and that bone is already suspected of being weak, so it is not advisable to make an opening for it with this medicine, as strong pressure can lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate except by true dislocation, and it does not happen to those joints as it happens to other small joints with a slight displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways, as it can be dislocated at the internal divisions, or at the external divisions, or at the front divisions, or at the back divisions.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Moreover, it is more commonly dislocated at the internal divisions and less so at the front or back divisions.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation at the internal divisions is that when you adjust the thigh of the patient with the healthy one, it is longer and the inner edge is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg without twisting it, and the area where it bends is marked with a cauterized wound, so that the head of the thigh has already been reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to which external dislocation happens is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this symptom.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to which front dislocation happens is that the thigh expands according to its form, but it does not bend without pain in the front, and if it is pressed, it cannot go forward towards the front; and the urine of him is retained and the wound of him is marked, and you should walk on tiptoe.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to which back dislocation happens is that the front does not expand or bend in front of the wound, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the wound is softened, and the head of the thigh is to be found there.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and long-standing, in which case it has already healed with your application of reduction and remains in its position; in that case, this treatment is not complete; therefore, no opening should be made.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, then you must attempt to return the joint and extend it inwardly and outwardly at the joints inside and outside, moving it to the left and right. This will naturally return it without needing any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return by this method, then you must prepare strong medication and extend the joint from the lower part, either with your hands or a lime that is tied onto the joint above the wound; another minister should extend his hand upwards in such a way that he places his hands below the tendons of the dislocated limb; and another minister should firmly pull the rope at the root of the affected area, and another minister should hold the end of the rope tight.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension (of the joint) should be from the lower part to the ankle at the angle of the collarbone, or from the lower part at the back to the joint of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension should be done in one go, while the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is a common method for all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns by what has been said, it will be good; otherwise, you must resort to whatever method of treatment that is specific for each case.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction (maneuver) for a dislocation, when the dislocation is inward at the joints, the patient should be laid on their back; and cushions should be placed on both sides of the affected area, from the root of the joint to where the thigh meets the groin. Then, extend the ropes outwards beyond the angle of the collarbone to the same level as the opposite shoulder joint.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong minister should grasp the arms of the patient, and firmly pull the large part of the affected area outwards in the opposite direction using violent extension, as this will return it to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is simpler for treating the affected limb and reducing it compared to other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from treatment using this method for any reason, then you must bind both of the patient's feet together with a strong and light rope, running it through both ankles and both wrists.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part (of the rope) should be four fingers, while the affected limb should be extended more than the other by two fingers' width.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the post, and at a height; and the distance from the ground to the patient should be two arm-lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to strike the head of the affected area and suspend another strong young man from the patient. The third young man should pull on the affected limb with force to push it back into its original position, as it will return quickly in this manner.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction (maneuver), when the dislocation is outward at the joints, have the patient lie on his back as we have previously instructed; and tighten the ropes around the affected area and the feet of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two posts should be placed, one under the feet and the other at the head; and adjust two more posts to the middle of the beam that is fixed on top of which moistened cloths should be wrapped, so that the patient is not discomforted by the post being between their legs. This prevents the extension at the affected joints from being too tight.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend his part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if there are any objections to repeating the procedure, it will be very beneficial; otherwise, follow the instructions carefully as previously mentioned and proceed with the guidance provided.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The patient must lie down on their side (quietly).
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is at the hips, then the leg should be gently extended, as described in this narrative; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected hip, holds it there with the left, and applies traction to the extended leg away from the hip on the opposite side.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the hips behind, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended on their back and lifted off the ground; instead, a hard object should be placed under the affected hip, as described earlier if the groin area is dislocated outside the body (as mentioned earlier, placing two hard objects beneath them will help with the positioning). The patient should lie on their face, and their limbs should be extended according to what was previously mentioned, as there seems to be no benefit in doing so.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compress should be applied with a board to the joint area where the dislocation occurred.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, as the reduction process is complex (and its sign is not hidden from you), it's essential that you extend both of the patient's legs and observe when their leg muscles relax and their affected limb extends with no hesitation; at this point, you should know which member needs to be returned (based on the situation). Then, you adjust two cushions and place a compress and bandage in such a way that the intestine is not injured in any of the areas; hold the patient down for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the bandage and compress, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you observe that the muscles have relaxed, it means the dislocation has been corrected, and at that point, let the patient rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you notice any signs of swelling or inflammation, then return and compress the affected area, extend it according to your initial instructions, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove the bandage and make the patient wait to walk for several days until they feel comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On treating hip dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hip can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outside the body, inside the body, or more commonly behind, but not in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of hip dislocation is when you instruct the patient to apply pressure on their hip, and if they cannot, it indicates that the hip is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all three dislocation methods is to position the patient correctly so that they can extend their leg if possible; place your hands on either side of the affected hip, and hold their foot between yours; press the affected hip with both palms, holding it firmly while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the hip returns to its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of hip reduction is when the patient's hip adheres to the bed without any effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then compress the affected area and hold the hip to the bed, bind it with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandages.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they have recovered and feel comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction is not successful for you, administer strong traction on the muscles that were mentioned in the treatment of the thigh (preceding narrative).
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On treating ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight manipulation and other times requires compression, and the dislocation of the ankle can occur internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is that you observe swelling originating from the side where the dislocation occurred.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for ankle manipulation is gentle reduction and ensuring that it is easily extended and repositioned.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of ankle dislocation caused by compression, it is necessary to position the patient correctly and have a strong and capable assistant from the opposite side of the affected limb in the best possible position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you place your right hand on the top of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the leg near the heel in the location of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand, grasp it twice and extend it while pushing the shin away from the cavity without strain. Then use your right arm to push the leg towards the hip joint.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And you shall do it twice as they have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then you push the legs of the foot onto the bed on the third observation, and you are at the head.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If it returns within an observation or two in this manner, and if the foot is swollen, that is good; and if not, then you shall repeat the operation, for he will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of it is forbidden by what they have recommended, then you lay the patient on his bed on the ground, and make a small hole in the ground, and place him inside, and you already have wrapped him with cloth so that you do not hurt the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then let the minister hold his legs, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or tied to the neck of the foot; and let each minister extend it to the extent of their reach, and the hole remain between the patient's legs, holding him so that the body is not stretched too far to the sides, as you must control its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor shall bind the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb to the sides, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared as your health of the reduction of it, then you pause plaster and place it firmly, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful or protect yourself from nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament over it is not too tight and hurt him strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two or three days; and if the ligament becomes softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he must walk in front of that space, it is not assured that the dislocation will not be dissolved and spoiled, and therefore it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it turns into an abscess cauterized, then you must provide for its expulsion in the place described in our account, in another place of care and binding, until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital. XXXIV. (Capitulum Sanitatis Pedum: On the Health of the Feet)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It must be bound with little extension without labor; and that which is not difficult, it will advance easily.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then you must cause the patient to place his foot on a suitable surface such as the ground or a table, and be standing as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand at the foot, and place your foot on something that is below the joints, and press it with your foot with force until it returns, and observe that it is bound and does not appear in a prominent position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And you place the belly of the foot on a table that takes the entire foot, with two legs, and press it firmly and securely for three days; and then loosen it and make it rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital. XXXV. (Capitulum Cauteria: On Cautery)
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation that are made by wound or fracture, or all together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of these occurs, and you immerse yourself in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many observations succeed death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore you must not presume over the cure of it, but one who is wise in the art, of long practice, compassionate and merciful, slow, neither reckless nor presumptuous; and that uses at the beginning of medicines that heal abscesses cauterized only, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and in which any hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore you must do the reduction at the beginning of the cause before the abscess becomes cauterized.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as we desire, then you administer the regimen that will relieve the abscess cauterized and heal the wound with what is appropriate for drying the wounds.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is with fracture and it occurs in separated joints, then you perform the treatment of them, and do as we said in simple illnesses before those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid as your virtue the instrument in the paths of fear according to what you have been preceded by my preaching; because that is better for you, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy for your true bodies at your times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albuccassis with which may God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
