Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus, the text begins with the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Therefore, my sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by complying with it, its end is achieved in it, and by explaining it, and by declaring it, it seems to me that I should complete that treatise for you, which is about surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is utterly deserted in our region and in our time, such that its science is greatly endangered, and its instruments are abandoned; it remains only some small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have become obscure and lead to errors and confusion until their intentions are closed and their strength and art is prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I shall revive that order of the treatise according to its exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the shapes of cautery instruments and other tools of work along with the addition of a description, as well as their preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	However, the reason why there is not a good artisan with his tools in this time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy which includes knowledge of the joints and shapes of the members; and the connection and separation of them; and have knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, as well as their number, and the incision of them; and of the arteries that pulse and those that are quiet, and the locations of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said in his words, much depends on the name, but in work, it is even more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	However, we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not skilled in what we have told you about anatomy cannot avoid error, and it causes men to die as I have seen many times, because some are trained in this science and abandon it due to lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a mad and skilled doctor make an abscess called scrophilus in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that a large amount of blood flowed until the woman died among those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who was in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him and cut out that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for it to be extracted, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a black prisoner who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with bladders and sticks with strong structure, but did not let the wound breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he wrapped it according to his desires, and applied the dressing, and left him for some days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and thus it was until the thigh and leg became abscessed and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called for it, prepared to remove the bandages, and achieved calmness and alleviated his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not stop, and the corruption spread throughout the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who punctured an abscess called cancer, and it became ulcerated in several days, so that the evil of it was magnified by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For the cancer is free of black bile, therefore it is not necessary that it reach the entire body, but rather some member which is hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary that surgery be divided into two categories: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work associated with danger in greater situations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already explained this throughout the book in which there is an operation where there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against it and leave it alone, so that fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus, take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with compassion and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for God's grace to obtain salvation and a favorable outcome, and leave terrible diseases with difficult healing, and abandon the weapons that make you fearful, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for it remains in your glory, and thus in the world and in eternity in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galenus already said in some of his teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad diseases, for thus bad doctors will not be named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first capital section deals with the feet, their shapes, the instruments used and the ironwork of cauteries, as well as what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The second division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on abscesses and perforation, fumigation, boils, extraction of stones, and similar issues, all dealt with and organized according to the shapes of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The third division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting and similar issues; a section organized concerning the feet and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization with fire and acute medicine, as well as recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This treatment begins the entire book's discussion.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to discuss the quality of those cauterization remedies and their adverse effects, as well as when cautioning against cauterization is appropriate.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Thus I say that the discussion of the quality of the cauterization remedy and its adverse effects is lengthy, complex, subtle, and secret; it has been spoken about greatly by many wise people, and they disagree on it, but I will only discuss a small part of their discourse, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that cauterization generally involves all materials universally, with the exception of two categories: those that are called cauda without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the category of dry and material-less cauda, there is disagreement; some say that cauterization is beneficial for this condition, while others argue the opposite, stating that cauterization is not suitable for diseases characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry and material-less cauda with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he replies to the contrary, stating that cauterization is beneficial for all cases of dry and material-less cauda found in human bodies, as when you compare the body and its humidity with the nature of fire, you find that the human body is moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the discussion of this, that I have experienced this many times in practice.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary for me to repeat what has already been proven and practiced in the chapter on cauterization after further experience, and to understand the diversity of human conditions and the placement of diseases within them, as well as their causes, symptoms, and the time span of those diseases.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other cases there is no need for fear, especially with moist and cold diseases, since all doctors agree on those, and there is no disagreement about the use of cauterization for them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And understand, my children, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its benefits is due to the simplicity of the fire, since its action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized but only causes minimal damage to other adjacent members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine extends to members that are adjacent to it, and strong fire can bring disease difficult to cure and speedy decay.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything except excess, and it is already known by experience and long study in the art of truth about the causes; thus I am excused for the length of my discussion, and if it were not hidden in this book, I would reveal the secret about fire and the operation of it in bodies, as well as its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech that would aid you in your pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And understand, my children, that they disagree on the appropriate time for cauterization and delay the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, since the adverse effects of time are submerged in the benefits provided by the cauterization, and especially if cauterization is for pain or necessary pain-relief, such as fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because of the risk of malice, which is greater than minor harm due to the passage of time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus, do not let this discourage you, or my children, since those who are ignorant and foolish doctors only believe that the disease that is cured by cauterization does not recover at all times, and they delay its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as they think, for cauterization is simply a medicine that alters the condition and dries up the humidity that causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive cauterization surpasses the medicine in terms of its power and the effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease may return at some point in time, depending on the condition of the patient and the location of their disease, as well as its power, and what is prepared in their body due to an accumulation of superfluidity, and what is acquired by them through their diet and similar causes; otherwise, if the disease that receives cauterization is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cauterizing a tooth for pain or similar conditions, it is possible that the pain will not return, but rather it will be minor.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is rightly said, not that I understand in it, for I believe it is not healing that improves with medicine or any other reason for caution.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and my intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not to say when we administer methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not help, but rather at the end of the disease, they administer caution, and it helps with that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on, let's clarify that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the common interpretation or the superstitions of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, but they didn't say so because of the equality and nobility of gold's substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	The ancients also said that the place of cauterization does not burn, but this is not absolutely true, for I have already proved and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterizing with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when you perform cauterization with fire from gold, it is not recommended because the amount of gold used depends on the roughness of the gold itself and its ability to absorb, and if you adjust the flame to melt the gold in the fire, some layers may be formed due to the artisan's occupation of that material.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, cauterization should be performed with iron more delicately and properly in the execution of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered the ones related to feet within that section, for a clearer understanding of your request.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cauterization for pain in the head due to coldness and moistness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is used for coldness and moistness as the main cause of a number of symptoms, such as headaches, runny nose, ear discharge, excessive sleep, toothache, and hoarseness, as well as general illnesses caused by cold, including paralysis, convulsions, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, the patient should be purged with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity and age of the patient and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then command the patient to shave his head with a razor and instruct them to sit on a slanted bench with their hands resting on it.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the palm of your hand on top of the patient's head, just above the bridge of their nose between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the correct position has been discussed, mark that location with a pen, and then perform the olive oil cauterization, which is the form of this procedure:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place that small marking tool (tenta) on the location marked earlier and slowly draw it downwards in a way that your hand remains perpendicular to the surface, keeping it slightly constricted while you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand slightly and observe the location, and if you see any part of the bone being exposed, such as small grains of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand to that spot (or another nearby one) until the bone is visible as I have explained to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the area, let it stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then press on the affected area with a linen cloth and leave it there until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the painful area with a four-drug ointment until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	They say that when the wound is open, it should be kept moist, as it heals better and faster.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They say that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain there until some part of the coccyx bone is burned away.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then shave that which is close to the bone, and let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They say that if the cautery reaches the vertebra, it should be pressed strongly against the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the way to perform a small operation.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that the steam from the head will pass through that area.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not recommend these two types of cautery for everyone, but only in certain cases due to fear; and you should leave it, because in my opinion, it is better for your health when it is. For the head is exposed by solution of continuity of this kind, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is naturally frail.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and that method is the safest for your health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	If chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head occurs in the patient and it has been treated with hellebore, skullcap, caper bush, plasters, ointments, guaze, cudgels, bandages, and similar remedies, and if cauterization with one cautery has not helped or worsened the situation, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong in creation; and if it is not frail and does not suffer much harm, then cauterize it again with another cautery after a short time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that spot on the patient's forehead with a cautery until the bone is broken through.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose the amount that we have estimated and cauterize it with a cautery in the back of the head at the location known as "was," where the pustule is located.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And be careful not to expose the bone in this case, because the patient suffers great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	They will say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery used to cauterize the forehead and occipital region is more subtle than the one used for other head cauterizations, and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On non-ancient migration cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	If pain persists in the area of the skull or extends to the ear, medications that modify the head should be administered, followed by other treatment, which I have described in the guidelines for diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with an acute-burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Cauterization with an acute-burning medicine requires you to take a pair of tweezers, remove the hawthorn leaves and sharpen their ends on both sides of the skull.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And make an incision in the area of pain on the temple with a sharp lance until it enters hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Press firmly on the area under compression for constant pressure and leave it for three hours; then remove the hawthorn leaves and let the wound heal for two or three days, and press on the affected area submerged in oil until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Treat that with honey until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, do this with some acute-burning medications that I have written about in the treatise on acute-burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Cauterization with iron in this way: fire method for cauterizing is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called "clavih claus" because the head of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in its middle part it has a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Press on the painful area, rest your hand - so that the archery string is not harmed - and rotate the small iron slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of bone that is burned by the bone's edge is too large and the bone itself is destroyed, raise your hand to protect the artery that is nearby, so that blood does not flow out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse the affected area in saltwater and let it stay there for three days; then press the affected area with mustard oil and treat it with honey until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, cauterize the end of the culetar with a pointed cautery, and beware of cutting an artery in this modern emigration procedure.
Capitol quart.	Title fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Title of ancient emigration cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigration as you have said in the previous cure and what you have said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help with the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not fit what you said about the first cauterization with medicine or cautery with fire, then you must ignite the cautery rod until it is white-hot, indicating that it is on the location of pain along a line of sufficient length, or whatever; and then withdraw your hand for a moment and strike the artery and pierce through to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be cautious of the movement of the mandible, which is essential for chewing, and that the ligament not be injured and the nerves associated with it, and that there be no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of bleeding from the artery that was cut open, since in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to those who do not know what they are doing and are unskilled and inexperienced; let the operation be started with this.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come with the reminder of the regulation for bleeding an accident of the artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness is not treated by this cauterization and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in a more appropriate location on the head as we have said before, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter on artery compression with cautery having two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Title fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and it is cured with caustic agents and other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, which is called "puncture," as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point of the cautery near the inflammation, and direct it towards the environment of the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or in the vicinity of each example if the pain is in one location.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	With the cautery rod of the ear lance, go along slowly, inch by inch, since you need to probe the location with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery points all over the ear, and if that is the case, then be careful with the areas until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Title sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Treatise on cauterization of turtles.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The turtle disease that is cured with cauterization is not any other species that comes from the arrowhead, as it has been said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that enters by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of turtle disease with jars and ointments and bandages, and if the treatment does not work, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be made at the ear lobe, the second a small one on their temple, and the third should be the joining of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Place the cautery opposite to the diseased side, because the softening does not happen except on the healthy side.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the ear lobe above a small one on the forehead, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and after that place your hand over the cautery until the amount of the thickness of the skin has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the shape of the cauter, it is a surgeon's specialty, whose shape resembles a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Nevertheless, it is very delicate that the cauter you see there; and it is necessary to cut off any excessive roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area with the medicine until it has healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Treatise on cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When old apoplexy is treated with the medicine mentioned and the treatment does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head, second at the most suitable place on the head as previously said, third at the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is done as previously mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	This sentence seems to indicate that cauterization has been done at the mouth of the stomach, it is later in the treatment, and it should be cured with something that processes (heals). However, without more context, I cannot provide a definitive translation or interpretation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Treatise on cauterization of forgetfulness caused by arrowhead.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient large jars and pills for softening at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster described in the treatise on plasters at their neck.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Let that area rest for certain periods, as it is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the orderly method mentioned previously.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if they recover well with that, otherwise do three cauteries in the lower part of their head, which are descending from the upper part of their head towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Let there be rest between each cautery and take care of the cautery with something that processes (heals).
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient is tolerant and you want to add something more, then cauterize in the most suitable place, if you want even more, then cauterize it over both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care of that until it heals and make sure the cauteries are olive-shaped as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Treatise on cauterization for relief and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to process the head with jars and the medicine mentioned previously, and shave the patient's head, cauterize it in the most suitable place on the head, over all the corners of the head, at the lower part of their head, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for softening the body of the sick person due to numerous cold humors and the patient cannot tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and cauterize again until the pain subsides, and raise the patient's head.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then heal it until it is healed, and this should be done with olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but rather that epilepsy caused by poisoning.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, first treat the brain of the patient at the onset with mercury and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer emetics and powders to cleanse, with this for several days, and improve the quality of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize that area with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the occiput of the head, and above each ear, cauterize as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that area with cauteries as previously mentioned, having paralyzing and softening effects on the vertebrae of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	The cautery should be olive oil according to what was previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, pause with fine cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy:
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and heavy cold humors, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have mentioned in having a paralyzing effect.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining into melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give that which cleanses the brain of the patient as mentioned before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply the turtle shell properly made on top of the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be lying down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then place liniment; it is worth binding with sheep wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that area on the fire for a moderate heating until it feels warm when placed there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place it back in the middle of the head on the circle and leave it until it is sweated out.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Do this with the patient every week once, and with the other treatment for him until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize that area with small points as much as possible, without having your hand with a prepared cautery: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that area in bandages or in gauze of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of descending water in the eyes:
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have announced the start of fever in the head through the signs I've mentioned earlier in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that clears their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And have him shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it's the beginning of fever in two eyes, or one cautery if it's the beginning of fever in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin with a cautery; and make the cauterizations in a long line across the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Keep yourself away from blood flow when you are cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and the abscission of those, and caution regarding blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized just below two bones with two cauterizations carefully performed.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the ancient method of cauterization for tear ducts.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tear ducts in the eyes are chronically discharging due to the veins and arteries that are evidently outside the head and it is determined that this is excessive, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned earlier in the chapter on the beginning of fever in the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauterizations at each temple, and two cauterizations at the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there is need for additional treatment, then cauterize it along the entire length of the inner corner of the eye above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the method of cauterization for nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating the condition I mentioned earlier and your treatment is not effective, then prepare yourself and give the patient eye drops for three nights; and shave their head and cauterize it with a mild cautery using olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize it with a camphor-based cautery and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, just under the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Be careful not to cut the artery while performing the procedure.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The form of camphor-based cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the method of cauterization for softening eyelids in eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of an eye becomes soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid using a cautery and this lunar cautery; here is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize it on both eyebrows with a small pair of cauteries in all parts, and they should extend beyond the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the size that the third part of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterization of the eyelid when the hair turns into parts inside and the eye is inflamed.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the eyelid turns into parts inside so that it pricks the eye, cauterization is done in two ways, because cauterizing can be either to burn or to cure with medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterizing with fire is done, command the patient to wash their eyelids as those who clean them do, until they are elongated and cooled down; and if it hurts him, you should anoint his eyes with something so that it does not get worse until the hair grows back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then wait until the hair is grown and cooled down, place a cloth on the patient's head, and hold your hand over the eyelids of his eyes with a sign according to the shape of a holly leaf, and let the start of the sign be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then wait for a suitable time in goose oil or chicken broth over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring the heat of the cautery that is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize slowly over the shape that you have marked, in small dots, until the surface of the skin, which is like a holly leaf, is burned completely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of healing for your work is that you will see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs rise above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore lift it up and let it rest for three days, and wait over it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that one with saliva until it is cured.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns for some cause with saliva and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cauterization over it as you did the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place, cools down and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if cauterizing with medicine is done, command the patient to wash their eyelids until they are elongated and cooled down, and make a paper or cloth of the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known incense and live coal to burn. That is, And what is it for, and mix those things well, and do it with haste so that it does not get spoiled; and spread that mixture over the paper that is made in the shape of a holly leaf, and let it rest on one eye or both; and rest the eye in goose oil or chicken broth, and let the patient's head be on your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And let it rest on the medicine and press it gently without causing discomfort to the patient, because discomfort is like burning.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore when you perceive that the anus has been burned, remove the medicine and wash it with water; therefore when the burning stops, reapply the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is raised as it should be after burning or cutting, because in this case it is good; and if it returns to the medicine on the same spot where the medicine has not been pressed and has not deteriorated until your operation is healed and the hair grows back.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And wait over it until the skin is healed by burning or another method until it is cured.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to guard your operation with diligent vigilance so that no foreign body falls into the wound, and if the eyelid becomes swollen within a few days and any cause of pus forms in the wound, then you should repeat the medicine on that spot which has become swollen from the eyelid, and proceed similarly as you did at first, and place it there until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Here is the mullein leaf form.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore, according to this, make your stitching.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not conceal the direct path for that one who is learned in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula as I have told you in the divisions of diseases and do not provide a cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to tilt their head towards you, and hold their head with some servant between your hands in such a way that they are neither harmed nor agitated by the tilting.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cotton swab soaked in olive oil or mullein leaf paste on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And approach with an iron-tipped cautery that has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	That is concave, similar in shape to a reed or feather quill with one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should be penetrated into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it protrude like that.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open and drain and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then you should open it and remove the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the hot cautery on it and hold the cautery with your hand a small distance from the eye, so that neither you nor the patient is agitated, and then press the cautery on the corners of the eye and burn the area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at first, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, then press on that spot with a binder and pour exsiccatiu (a drying agent) onto it until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has been more than ten days and it is not healed, then press a sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary in its respective chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here is another method for cauterizing a fistula that was mentioned earlier: Put your finger in the location of the fistula and press it so that it closes, then place a small camelian (a type of shell) containing the amount of lead melted into it; hold your hand with good control, so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead will not reach the eye of the person; and you should press on the eye of the patient with a cotton swab soaked in olive oil or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the cauterization and treatment as I have described, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula into the nostril in its respective location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Here is the translation of the line:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Swollen sores often occur in the lips, especially in infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Since the treatment you've been using for the sores in the lips does not seem to be effective, then use a small pointed cautery knife according to this procedure:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The concavity of the area should be according to the fineness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place a cushion carefully over those sores until the cautery reaches the edge of the sores.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Apply the ointment (cerote) over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fissure in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess appears at the root of the uvula or palate or in the gums, and it breaks, becomes chronic, and turns into a fistula (tunnel-like opening), and if your treatment does not cure it, then it is necessary to cauterize according to the size of the fistula, putting the heated cautery into the fistula tract, keeping your hand in until the fire reaches the edge of the fistula, do this once or twice; and apply the ointment (as previously instructed) until it has healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the abscess is drained and healed, that's good; if not, it is necessary to discover its location and excise the rotten bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad and not cured with medication, then place the patient's head on your lap, hold the cautery tool in the form specified below, place it on the tooth and quickly insert it into the gum, keeping your hand a little away from the tooth so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Lift up your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times as you desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then stop, because a bad tooth is closed and a softened gum becomes strengthened and corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to heat or inflammation, or there is no improvement with medication, then cauterize in two ways: either with a cow's horn (i.e., a bovine horn) or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cauterization with the cow's horn involves taking a bovine horn and heating it in an iron container, then carefully cover the end of the horn with a cloth and immerse the heated horn bulb in a container of boiling water (or oil), and place it quickly over the painful tooth until it is warmed up.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Repeat this process several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you prefer, immerse wool or cloth in the bovine horn mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and keep it there until the iron becomes hot and reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is when you pay attention to the tip of the instrument (either metal or wood), making sure it has some roughness and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Heat the cautery tool in the specified form, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is warm; do this several times as the pain subsides or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to apply pressure to the patient's mouth with that pointed cautery and hold it for an hour, and then gently rinse it; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize (the affected area) with whatever sharp instrument you have available.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterizing Hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	If the hernia is due to inflammation and cold humors, and it does not respond well to medications, and you want to facilitate digestion of those, then ignite the pointed cautery in the shape indicated below, having two ends pointed for the smoke to escape through one end, and hold the ignited cautery on top of the abscess once, and if necessary, enter it further until reaching the edge of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, wait for the cautery according to the size of the abscess and let it rest for three days and place it on the edge where the humors have gathered until it has burned what the fire has ignited.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Apply ointment, poultices, and bandages to it until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or pointed cautery should be as shown:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the throat and more so when it is accompanied by inflammation, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicines at first, then carefully cauterize the affected area with a silver-tipped cautery.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Be careful not to touch or burn the glottis with the cautery nor char the surrounding area, only a small part.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that area with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the lower spinal area.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery should be pointed as shown in the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Take care of it with what was previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	If cough and lung disease are due to excessive moisture, the patient does not have a fever or runny nose, and it is an old affliction, then cauterize the affected area with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas near the lion's mouth and bull's horns; and with another cautery at the midpoint of the leg between the nipples; and ensure that the cauteries are pointed as shown previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, use punctate cauterization with the cautery called "puncta," whose shape is as previously shown in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Make points at those places; and take care of it with what was previously described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now, the cautery should have three prongs for cauterization: with one application, you can perform three cauterizations in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of ticks that are at the head of the helper (i.e., the lymph node).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the lymph node is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and has not been properly repositioned at its return, you should keep the dislocation in place until it is time for it to return, and with a slight movement, move it back into position as described earlier. In this case, first, you must reduce the dislocation, then have the patient lie down on their back or side, and lift the skin that is inside the tick near its base and raise it above the affected area with your left hand if the joint is dislocated internally.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The cautery should have two heads; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Cauterize the skin, making sure it penetrates through to the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization when using four cauterizations with four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and that thin one according to the amount of thread; and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Place the patient on the cautery covered with salt, and have them remain calm, ensuring that the affected limb is not injured for any period of time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is above and it cannot be repositioned, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple punctate cauteries, as the joint will be strengthened, the humidity will be reduced, and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Title .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	When the stomach is burned with a hot iron (cautery).
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is froth and mucus in the stomach that expands rapidly from its original location and multiplies, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without consulting another doctor, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with their arms and legs extended, and carefully cauterize it with three cauteries: one below the feet about the width of a finger, one below each costal bone (rib), forming a triangular figure; and extend between them so as not to form a blister.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is twice the thickness of a fingernail.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	The shape of the cautery should be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize at the appropriate place in the stomach with a large cautery in this shape; and this should be a cautery shaped like a circle in this way:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	The stomach should be cauterized in the location that is scared by this cautery: and you may make points on the stomach as much as you wish with trial, and carefully cauterize those locations with the cautery; and care for it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	De cauterizacio del cors.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterizing the groin hernia.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the groin due to heat or moisture or swelling that moves outside of its normal position by excess efflux and the patient is treated with what has been mentioned without consulting another doctor, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with their hips elevated, and three cauteries should be made according to this shape and quantity at the groin below the hip bones.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	The space between each cautery should be equal to the width of a finger, and the cauterized areas should be along the length of the body in a straight line.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press down on the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of medicine applied is equal to the thickness of the skin, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then make them sit, which you have already extended their legs, and lift their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery: [In this case, there seems to be no direct English equivalent for "cauteri" as it refers specifically to an ancient medical tool used for burning or cauterizing, so I will provide both the Old French and the Modern French terms, 'cautère' (Old French) and 'cautérisateur' (Modern French).]
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you can use this cautery with a cautery scalpel, when you are skillful and careful in the art. [This sentence seems to suggest that using a specific type of cautery requires skill and care.]
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and ensure that the patient's wound is covered completely so that all parts of the body are affected, as the wound here is delicate; beware. [This sentence seems to warn about caution when performing a cauterization, emphasizing the need for complete coverage of the patient's wound due to its delicacy.]
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII [The number indicates that this is the twenty-eighth chapter of the treatise.]
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Perforation of an Abscess in the Liver with Cautery. [This title suggests that the following discussion concerns a medical procedure to drain or remove an abscess located in the liver using cauterization.]
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you suspect or discover an abscess in the liver and wish to know whether this abscess is within the liver tissue or its capsule, if it is located in the liver tissue, the patient feels heaviness and pain intensifies. [This sentence appears to describe a symptom of an abscess located within the liver tissue.]
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If the abscess is located in the liver capsule, with intense and sometimes prolonged pain afflicting the doctors attempting to treat it. [This sentence seems to describe a difficult situation where treating an abscess in the liver capsule can be challenging due to the intensity and persistence of the patient's pain.]
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their back; and then, gently probe the location of the abscess with tweezers; and apply a pointed cautery resembling thread, whose shape has been described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Then cauterize with that same cautery until the whole abscess is burned out, until it reaches the skin, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the one by treating other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this cautery method alone, but rather study the art of medicine extensively and learn about other treatments for various diseases; however, in some cases, experimenting with this operation may be necessary, but always read what has been written before, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients cauterized wounds using the cauteries of aristry for treating wounds; and it is this that you should take from the long dry cautery, a long thin one which can be found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that one in oil and heat it up, and cauterize at the location between the neck and the collar with a small cautery guided by two smaller ones, one slightly sloping down near the beard area, and two more on the side between the fifth costa and the sternum, slightly sloping downwards; and another in the middle of the leg; and another on the stomach, and three on the rear; and one in the location between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the thighs, after the cautery located between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be clearly visible on the surface of the abscess during operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients used a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heated it, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reached the abscess and pus was drained out, as has been said about the abscess in the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But there is no fear in this perforation with cautery, for one can quickly die if a fistula forms at the location where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of boils.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating a boil as described in the previous section and you do not follow the treatment guidelines, then cauterize at the location where the boil is using one of three methods, all of which are appropriate. The first method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cauteries described for the thigh.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	The size of each cautery should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly larger, and the method of cauterization should be as described in the treatment of the thigh.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not press your hand with the cautery; instead, let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two tweezers, as described in the section on dislocation of a muscle. This causes the skin around the boil to lift, making it easier for the patient to lie still during treatment without causing further pain or discomfort.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you lift the bed in accordance with the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert two hot irons into the opening where the bed penetrates that of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then take out the cautery; therefore, four cauteries should be made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three hot irons.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And cure the cautery which has been laid for three days, because it is more suitable than the other causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries should not be used in dropsy, but rather in specific cases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment does not confer improvement, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery at the right side of the feet, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the size of the bedsores.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then allow the cautery to cool down for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization, but rather let them rest for two intentions, and hasten their recovery with assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to treat the abdomen should be rectangular, as per the shape mentioned earlier, and it is the one that is used to treat the back which is oval, as per its shape in the preceding description.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and joints.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by dropsy and filled with sterile water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the ankle and heel, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then lift your hand, but do not pull it completely away as the sterile water flows out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped as follows: Two cauteries should be made on each joint, and in each joint, a cautery should be made with the cutting end of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be as long as the joint: the first one at the top and the other lower along the joint; and on each joint, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Allow the wound to heal slowly without treatment for a long time, so that some water drains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat these conditions as mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal masses.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal mass is due to putrefaction and moisture causing it to soften the vertices (vertices), it is a digestive and retentive virtue that resides in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, but sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization revealing virtue. In such cases, cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach as described in the stomach cauterization process, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, a thin cautery; and with a cautery on the liver that is large or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if excess moisture persists and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the flanks and on the intestines, pressing two cauteries together strongly on the stomach near the inguinal region, as this treatment is perfect for such a condition without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of chronic diarrhea.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When chronic diarrhea is of a natural origin or due to cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the methods mentioned in the division but their treatment does not confer improvement, then cauterize it with three cauteries on the pus below the small spinal bones and on a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel through two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes their face swells, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and one cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen with a thin cautery, leave the cautery for some time, and treat the patient until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV. (Note: I've corrected the number since the text you provided seems to have skipped a chapter.)
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	For cautionery of an athlete's foot, it is appropriate for its abscess to be drained.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you drain the athlete's foot, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray (for searing or stopping bleeding).
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place a metal instrument (tweezers) into the abscess of the athlete's foot, and ensure that it goes deep enough to reach the vein from which the pus is flowing.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, because if the abscesses are numerous, you should cauterize each one as needed, and take care of them with bandages until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If a large cautery is used on someone, it works better in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	For the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the groin area.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, heal it with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in nature, and it is old and the corruption of decaying flesh and pus accumulates there, it is appropriate to try to cure it gently with subtle probes and measure the depth of the probe accordingly.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply the cautery that resembles a ray (for searing or stopping bleeding).
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Place that heated cautery into this fistula, and to the depth that the probe penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the cauterization over that area until the decaying flesh is burned off one time or two or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the bladder or intestine, beware of all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area, and you think it does not penetrate any further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then bandage the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the area is sealed and the material is drained from it, and remains in this state for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the material is not expelled from the body, you will know that it has penetrated deeper or is rotting in the bone, or be cautious of these causes as they may return to the area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	For the cauterization of the nose (nasal polyps).
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the nose is painful due to inflammation or congestion, and the patient experiences discomfort, it is appropriate to cauterize that area on each nostril with a pointed cautery, preceded by memory of the previous cauterization.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And make the cauterization with a smaller delay between each one, so that three cauterizations will be lined up, and thus they work better in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	For the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to inflammation and humidity, causing the patient to be unable to retain urine, you should cauterize that area below the bladder, starting at the base of the penis, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the hole; cauterize that area with a pointed cautery in the lower part of the wound, or with two cauterizations if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Use a pointed cautery as needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	For the cauterization of the uterus (womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When inflammation and humidity occur in the uterus, making conception prohibited, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, delayed, and painful, it is appropriate to have that area cauterized with three cauterizations around the navel, similar to the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the wound or two cauterizations, and use a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture collects at the joint of the ankle and causes swelling of its location, the sign is that it is elongated compared to the other one when compared with each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is sought where there is a gap.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery because you will have a sign of the test in the circle around the joint as it is rotated, and thus the joint falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the shape of the cautery be the same as that used for the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three small cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Make the cautery according to the size of the swelling in the entire limb, and apply it to the area that needs healing.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the ankle joint and caused by cold and moisture, the patient is healed with the water that we have said and not contraindicated, which is ancient remedy. Therefore, you should release the patient from heavy humors with fetid or artificial pills or similar ones; and apply a cautery to it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of using the cautery in that case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicines that burn or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	If you use the method of burning, then cauterize it on the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries in this manner; make sure to achieve good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Make the space between each cautery equal to the thickness of the finger, and if the large olive-shaped cautery or the small one is used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, the cautery is applied at the middle of the ankle joint because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of ankle dislocation, the one that is circular and burns the entire swelling.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the leg, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the leg at the location where the pain is felt, and one cautery on the thigh for four fingers away from the shin.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If a knife-shaped cautery is used, the depth of the cautery should correspond to the size of the swelling in the limb.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain is extended into the location near the toes, then you cauterize it here where the pain is felt with a cautery for three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the patient experiences pain behind the thigh, then you cauterize it here with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Keep in mind that in all cases of cauterization, you should not overdo it with the cautery such as burning nerves or large vessels, because by doing so you are causing harm to the patient or contractions.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one or more of those who cauterized on the thigh and overdid it in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed to the point where the tumor reached the foot, and the foot was burnt and corrupted completely.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And in this case, there is no solution other than death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two joints, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	They say the wise few in the cauterization of ankle joint that this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron with its circumference equal to a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a finger or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Inside this circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the knuckles on the back of the hand; these circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these gaps should be one or two knuckles, and make a decorative edge on the circles in an appropriate manner. And this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire and place it inside until it burns and sparks, and approach and hold it over the ankle's incision, the patient lies on the affected side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that area with three cauterizations at a time.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Keep it closed for three days, apply ointment to the border and leave the wound open for several days, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	In the name of Al-Zahrawi, my son: we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance and because few have found those who can use it effectively.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More than the other cauteries on the one who endures it, and identify where it is in him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauteries are those that are mixed with medicines which you should make two circles, one perforated ring through which passes the iron rod of the door's hinge; its width in the depth should be two knuckles or whatever their size is.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each finger is of a certain width, and they are open from above and below, and they contain something in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Place it over the ankle's incision while the patient lies on the affected side, press your hand on the ankle incision; take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be similar to a small fire gradually, and hold it for the duration of one hour, and make the patient bear the pain and adjustment of it - since this biting sensation is like fire - until the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the instrument and wash the hot water from the entire ankle with sweet water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Keep it closed for three days, place ointment on the border until the blackness of the adjustment has subsided, and keep it closed for several more days, and run pus from it; this is the last step in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Treat it with poultices until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make it in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the quenching of both ankle parts with a single layer, and stir and pause in a new wave, where the surface below is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Wait below the wave and the following wave, pour the alkali and living water on it, which rises for a finger, and press them with your hand for good compression, and let the hole that comes out of the sharp water in the perforated surface below flow into the wave below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approach and adjust all that water, pour the following living water and more alkali over it, because at this point it will have a strong acute action, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterizations of other members, since it is an operation that produces fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And these are some of the medications that are cauterized widely, such as tamarind and honey with cinnamon mixed in them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts the operation and treatment of a man from antiquity by which ankle pain and sciatica pain are cured, and it is a great miracle that this was done, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, since it is healed in one day as recommended, for this remedy has proven effective over time.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken certain herbs such as wild celery root, and if it is not found, then fresh figs should be used; and it should be stirred with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and left.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	It should be left for the duration of three hours or until the patient bears the adjustment pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And immerse it in hot water, and when the patient's body is warmed up, apply it to the skin, since the pain stops and it heals.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use these medications with cauterization, but rather promote the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, Scorides says that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will improve more; the method of cautery for this should be: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes and the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dried sheep's vein and inflate it with fire until carbon is formed; place it on the wool and let it expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this procedure, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called the cowhocautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Treatment of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in two places due to various causes such as injury or blow, or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, by the infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cautery does not apply in any other case except for this particular one, which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuation of the patient is performed with pilules dissolved and similar to them, made on the two places where there is pain three fingers' width away from it, except that more tentative cauteries or fewer are used along each line, according to the quantity coming from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The cautery should be applied with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medium-sized claw shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the beginning of gouty inflammation.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	In most cases, this illness occurs in children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their structure becomes swollen and stiff, with limited mobility.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it gradually becomes noticeable in the lower end of the spine and the neck bones that are beginning to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this and wish to stop it, cauterize with a circular cautery in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery should be taken over the entire spine in all directions.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points should be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Attend to the place until it is healed with what has been said above.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Also beware that a cautery should not be administered in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout is treated by means of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then apply cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize the joint in the foot's area with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let the olive-oil cautery be its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go into the nails or other joints, and it seems necessary, then cauterize that spot on each nail with three or four cauteries all around using this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need more cauterizations, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand; just surround the area with the cloth.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain goes into both nails, then administer the cautery as mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce the circle of the toe as it rotates, and pierce along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then pierce the circle of the toe around each nail and on the base of the thumb.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach after some days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all around their assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good care and reception of medicines, for if it is done well with proper diet and this cautery is applied, God will heal him.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you find a rupture in the groin and it is preceded by intestines appearing below the hernia, then you should have the patient fast on his own days and use softening agents to relieve the hernia of his stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And you should keep the patient close to your hands over his groin, and order him to keep his legs together until the hernia is expelled or it appears again.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And you return it to the place mentioned and tell him to try to stretch the rupture over the bones of the pubis, pointing out the end, which should resemble the size of a small circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you heat the cautery that has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is red-hot and sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And you place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery steady, and bring it into the bone of the pubis until you reach the middle of the duct; repeat this process if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Be careful to observe the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine, which would cause death or some other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, do not consider your procedure successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Cautiously care for the burned area for three days until the scar of the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain on his back for forty days until the wound and the blister have been sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to feed him according to the length of his healing time, which should relieve his stomach, and the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time to move after forty days, administer medicine gently and keep him for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him rest from work and replenish his food and drink, and abstain from excessive speech, for if he uses this method of healing completely, he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and first of all, do not stop. If you want to cauterize the rupture using a ring-shaped cautery of the appropriate size, then it should be done as follows: pierce the hernia with the third part (the area between the two ends) of the body, and care for it according to what has been said, not otherwise.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the first ones said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, for it is named in this way by trial:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is made across the width at the length, then above the rupture, and another line above it; and press your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	This seems to be a reference to a chapter number. The numbers in Roman numerals are: I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI. The number xlvi in Roman numerals is LXVI, which does not appear among these numbers. It seems that the text might have been miscopied or the chapter numbering system used is different from standard Roman numerals.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	This line appears to be a title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Twisted Things". However, without context it's hard to say for certain as the term "torcio" is not found in standard Latin or medieval medical texts and might have a specific meaning in this particular treatise.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When accidental or traumatic pain occurs in some parts of the body and persists for a long time without relief from medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cauteries should be of all members according to their size and smallness, their virtue and development, and the location of twisting and pain in them.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the first cauterization heals, it is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization on it; for it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member adjacent to the one affected, so you must achieve that with cautionery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	This line appears to be another chapter title number. The translation would be "Chapter LVII". However, it's unclear which numbering system the author used as LVII in Roman numerals is LXVII, not xlvi or LVII in standard Roman numerals. It may have a specific meaning within the context of this treatise or the author's culture.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	This line appears to be another title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Leprosy". However, it should be noted that this treatment is not supported by modern medicine and that leprosy can typically be treated with antibiotics rather than cauterization. The use of cauterization for leprosy may indicate an earlier understanding of the disease or a different approach to treatment in medieval medicine.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some forms of leprosy are treated with cautionery to great advantage, and particularly if the type of leprosy that is caused by corruption of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what has been said in the division and not dissipate, nor spread, and fear that corruption spreads throughout the body of the patient and their entire complexion, then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another below it, move the forehead to the end of the hairs; and both on two corns; and one behind, on the nape or serve.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little into the bone and make a small indentation, and from there displace the scars so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the marrow as previously specified.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that have been specified in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheekbones, and two cauteries on two spondylus bones in the neck, and six cauteries on the spondylus bones in the back, and a large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and two on each elbow, and one on each wrist, and two on the wrists, and two on the fingers, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over each talon of his feet, and over the phalanges of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on top of the talons.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some forms are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and others on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know that the more closely cauteries are adjusted, the more beneficial and effective it is; know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, as they do when burned, because the body of the patient is already paralyzed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the specifications of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Care for the cautery with flour of errors cooked with honey and other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	This line appears to be another chapter title number. The translation would be "Chapter LVIII". However, it's unclear which numbering system the author used as LVIII in Roman numerals is LXVIII, not xlvi or LVII in standard Roman numerals. It may have a specific meaning within the context of this treatise or the author's culture.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	This line appears to be another title of the text. The translation would be "On Cauterization of Paralysis".
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stiffened or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you cauterize the stiffened member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the cautery should penetrate the thickness of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Care for it with honey until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some forms of paralysis that occur in the hands and feet, in the spine and vertebrae, and affect the nerves that move that member, are cauterized; and the paralysis is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not presume over this, except he who is skilled in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire body moving it.
Capitol .xlix.	(This seems to indicate that we are reading the 49th chapter or title of a text.)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of hernias which is morphia.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the hernia is old and does not respond to any of the medications, then you cauterize it with a cautery for a short time according to the size of the cystic swelling inside, until the white color and color of it changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with a mixture of barley and lentils with rose oil and the leaves of arnica, and the blood of a pigeon or the blood of a lark, each part separately, mixed together, then bind it with a cloth on top until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	(This seems to indicate that we are reading the first chapter or title of a text.)
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of crabs (a medical term, possibly for a type of skin growth).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery at the right place; but I do not see this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more appropriate that it should be cauterized around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a cautery instrument.
Capitol .li.	(This seems to indicate that we are reading the first chapter or title of another text.)
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, either due to excessive fluid or due to the state of the patient who is old and frail with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it around its circumference with a cautery instrument puncturing small points, and place leeches there which will hasten the maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you do this by igniting the cautery whose shape is as follows: and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the cystic swelling.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in a location that is further down (on the limb), to relieve the body of the arm; then heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	(This seems to indicate that we are reading the second chapter or title of another text.)
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corroded areas.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroded areas are corruption moving in the limbs, which corrupts it just as dry wood is consumed by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see the corroded area in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then ignite the cautery spikes few or many and large according to what is appropriate in the location where it is corroded.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And cauterize it completely from all sides until you eradicate the entire corruption and no cause of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let the leeches sit on it for three days, and place them over the cauterized areas so that they are sprinkled with oil mixed in between until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And heal it with meat-based medicines.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then you return to ignite the cautery over what has been cut in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corroded areas are sometimes treated with sharp medicine because such medicine is halfway between cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire is of greater assistance in the end.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said the healing with sharp medicine in the division (of the text), and therefore take that when you will have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	(This seems to indicate that we are reading the third chapter or title of another text.)
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of nails and their similarities.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times in the lower parts of the foot a disease occurs that is called a nail, which is large and deep-rooted, damaging the foot; and cauterization in these places is done in two ways, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is igniting the hollowed-out cautery shaped like a pen, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the entire nail from all sides, and it should have fine grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the heated cautery on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let the leeches sit on it for three days, and let it start to ooze pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply the plaster made from wild mallow leaves mixed with salt on it, and let the leeches sit on the plaster during the night, because that will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And heal the location where the flesh has grown with medicines.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert (meaning: the nail does not heal), and many times an abscess occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, namely by taking a syringe or needle or pen, and place it on the nail; and let the water flow slowly from the syringe into the groove of the nail, and hold the syringe, and rotate it with pressure from your hand all around it, and press the edge of the syringe against the root of the nail to force the hot water to enter through the root of the abscess; and let the patient wait an hour for the pain caused by the hot water to subside, and then remove the syringe, because the nail along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus, arrange them (the patient) one against another facing all of whom is in the body (i.e., the physicians).
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then clean the wounds from which the pustules of scabs have been removed, and treat with the ointment those parts of the flesh that have been grated.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremors (trembling or shaking).
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has tremors due to cold affecting the nerve or because of a fever caused by cold, or for some similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize that person with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra there should be one cauterization; and on the feet, and over the stomach, use an olive-oil cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides and hastens the healing of the cold-induced disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization of abscesses in the body (Translator's note: In this context, "albati" is used to refer to an abscess or boil)
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When an abscess appears in the body and is formed by large, corrupted materials, it must be cauterized at the beginning when it appears, with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood and its tip extended to fire; or with a long erostological lance; or with a slow cauterization (cauterio lentecular).
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	When some abscesses are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion (rupture) according to this method, and it is not believed, they are disrupted and healed from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done with appropriate evacuation using lancing (fleubotomy).
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 60.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of fluxes (influxions or inflammations) of blood in the body caused by arrow injuries through incision with a lance (arceria).
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Some abscesses caused by arrow injuries that are incised must be left uncovered (defored) or be lanced with a lance (apostema) or cauterized on the member, and similar conditions apply, and it remains difficult to heal it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when it happens to someone, take your hand and press on the site of the arrow injury, and place your hand over it so that you hold the wound tightly for several observed days until the influx of blood stops and does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place the olive-oil cauterizations few and large (i.e., thick) in the fire for many minutes until they become hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take either a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery has been broken, over that vein you must apply pressure as soon as possible to stop the bleeding, and then cauterize it before the bleeding becomes excessive.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood continues to flow from the opening of the artery when you apply pressure and remove the cauterization, then take another cauterization (prepared in the fire) and do not stop doing it until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here (nearby), and that another harm comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to stop the blood in such cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or cauterization as described earlier, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the blood is stopped, or using ligation with a strong ligature, or pressing over medicines whose purpose is to restrict the blood; and they should be tied firmly with a pulvinar (bandage) or compress.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Whoever administers a proper and necessary restriction to him, with bandages or by position for the purpose of healing and similar causes, should not cease doing so, but continue instead.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If anyone has a vein wound and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then pause the treatment on the indicated vein over its openings as we have said, and understand the great precaution to be taken until the blood stops from the superior part of the wound, and do not raise the archery (tourniquet) over it; and above the archery spray with cold water of great coolness until the blood is congealed and thickened; but continue in that which requires cauterization or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commence the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and perforations, and abscesses, and phlebotomy, and wounds, and their like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all disease in which cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for that purpose and the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the top of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And so, we will proceed in this chapter for the purpose of relieving the one who is suffering, as he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I begin, son, know that in this chapter is explained what was in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be in great caution, since in the operation that is in this chapter many things are observed for evacuation which is with blood from which life depends, the aspersion of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of a wound or extraction of pus or incision of stone and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these things there is fear and trembling, and in the greatest of them death lurks.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to let this happen to you, since in some cases you will have to behave like a healthy person with the behavior of sick people.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there is some who will leave with their sickness and death is easy for them, and so in this case by the vehemence of what they find from their sickness, and by the length of their sickness, and with the sickness that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from these there is one who gives you his wealth and instructions, hoping for your health, but their sickness is harmful to you.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to the one who comes to you with this kind of behavior; and your caution should be greater than greed and your avarice; and do not presume any cause about it without certain knowledge that confirms it, and on which good success depends.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the treatment of all your patients with prognosis and indication for the one to whom health has been converted, since in that case it assists you in acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and do not take guidance or protection from it, since it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	I have arranged this chapter divided into sections as was done in the chapter of cauteries, for the care of the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you request and of which you are in need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often affects children, and when the newborn infant is born with a swollen head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some periods occur mysteriously and are unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this illness in children; and all those whom I have seen are near death, so it seems to me that it is the work of Satan on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head continued to swell so much that he could not stop eating due to the great size of his head, and moreover, the moisture increased until it caused death by suffocation.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added either between the skin and bone, or below the bones on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the moisture is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a longitudinal slit, and the length of the slit should be about two inches so that the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head open on all sides and water flows out when you press the area with your fingers and not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; and broach it with vinegar and oil for five days, and then loosen the bandage and heal the wound with poultices and salves, and strengthen the head with equal amounts; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it is in the occiput or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appears, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Be aware that you do not cut the artery and make bleeding flow and kill the patient by the flow of blood with water drainage.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called auriculas.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Three.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When cataracts or swellings appear on the eyelids or feet, and it is an old problem and the medicine does not help, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise those that the patient raises his head, first rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and hold the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press each one on the places that are near the ears, and they become hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And hold onto the artery with a probe, and incise each one with a sharp tool that penetrates into the bone along the longitudinal incision of each part.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you want, insert the probe below the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers' width adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the touch, you must measure three fingers' width from the ear and probe inside the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	The amount of blood that should be drained is one cup. And be careful not to drain more or less, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the filling of the artery of him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Approach the wound, and since any cause of the fracture remains on the bone, then incise it to prevent purulent caution.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with linen and bandage it, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the hernias which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or chronic headache occurs due to unwholesome humidity in the temples or a sudden, violent, and similar headache, which is not amenable to medical treatment, we will treat this condition by hernia extraction in the temples or cauterization of those areas as described earlier.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of operation and hernia extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs in the temples; and understand the hernia visible in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to coldness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, then tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and warm up the area with a rough cloth or moisten the area with hot water until the hernia appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you take the spatula, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Approach the hernia with the spatula and press it gently until you reach the hernia; then cut it where it is easy to access and extract it from the abdominal cavity into the hernial sac and uncover the tunics that are underneath, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, you encase it with the index finger, and then make an incision along its length according to how much the extremities are contracted, and there will be no bleeding, because if they are not incised, blood cannot rise from it all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then evacuate the blood of a certain amount (unc). to three (cubits).
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the hernia is large, you must tie it in two places with strong double silk or cedarwood thread, and not cut it prematurely before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then incise the excess that is between two bandages; do it at that time or some other time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and remain in place for this surgical operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better not to perform the operation if the patient has fever or is completely heated, because cauterization helps reduce moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial in combination with other treatments.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to perform the hernia extraction in a clean and dry place, and place the patient comfortably, then treat it with dry medications that promote tissue healing and warm compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during the examination or treatment, bleeding from the hernia occurs, then you must stop the bleeding, either with a cautery, or by applying pressure to the area, and keep your hand over it until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of these is not present, then place your finger over the area until the bleeding clots, and moisten it with very hot water until the swelling subsides, and press it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	What is easier in the extraction of hernia is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, since you have tied the two places and untied them alternately, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be elongated, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	and the thickness of the two handles should be uniform.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the handles are not uniform in thickness, it is better, because if they are sharp like two blades near each other, they will not incise the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Thus, because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be maintained in them and the flesh should be incised easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This operation is better than all others and easier to perform.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two handles should be the same thickness as the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sharp and acidic coughs in the lungs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When sharp coughs occur and the lungs are located above the neck of the head and no cause for medical treatment is present, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels like ants are crawling on it, and the lungs become thinned, moistened to the point where their skin is known, and the paracelsus used this operation in the treatment of these conditions, and I name this treatment "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions longitudinally spaced apart according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two parts: one fissure should be as long as the distance from the nose to the middle of the forehead in the same place, and the second as long as half the movement of the eyelids which is at the lacrimal [area], and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Keep your hand away from the arcus (bony rim) of the eyes which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to three parts.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths to absorb the blood with it.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Place the spatula of two sharp points inside, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	This is from the parting of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the caul that is between the two incisions and close the one that is over the bone, then do so from the minor incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then straighten this spatula and insert it again into the first incision with another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the sides of that sharp instrument, cut the attached flesh and skin, and the edges of it the bone, and push it towards where the fissure is, and separate everything that descends from the head to the heels with it.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	However, if the incision is continuous, do so in the median fissure to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of blood flow has ceased, squeeze the places where the clots of blood are located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop at each fissure whenever a piece of old skin appears, and pause over those powdery substances embedded in wine, oil, and vinegar, and observe that it does not produce an abscess cauterized.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day remove the linen and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and care for it with basil oil and others until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ulcers by cauterization and sores descending from the divisions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an acute and continuous ulceration comes along with the weakening of sores in the patient's feet, and their observation shows that they are extended slightly, and their examination reveals debility, ulcerated eyelids, and loss of hair from them, as well as pain sharp and prolonged at the front of the head, then you should know by these signs that the matter and ulcers do not come except from the many veins that originate from inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for this is: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make a small incision in it at the same place on the forehead, starting from the left temple to the right temple; it should be an incision over the bone; extend your hand away from the eyelids of the temples which are painful due to chewing.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill between the lips of the fissure with a piece of old skin or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And strengthen over them powdery substances embedded in wine and oil to prevent an abscess cauterized from appearing.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the abscess has decreased, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone up to where it begins with raw flesh, and care for it with a drying regimen which will make the flesh heal, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this make a plaster and administer it in these sores on raw flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Chapter on the treatment of what cats in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that are found in the ears belong to four species: either they are mineral substances or resemble them, such as iron and glass, or are from plants like cheese or beans, or are fluid-like such as water and sweet wine and their similars, or animals.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when grit or other similar causes that do not fit or agree in the ear occur and the ear is stopped, if you see the stone, then distill some violated oil or sizam into it, and administer its extraction, and make it shake with condition, and apply drops to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then stop the ear canal with some cloth or wool pieces and stretch the ear at the top openings, as the movement is forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it's not resolved, administer the extraction with the instrument called gests epiticiarios, of which this is its form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it's forgotten with the syringe, that's good; otherwise, administer the extraction with a thin cannula of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it's not forgotten by that, you make a cannula of brass and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal and seal around the cannula with wax and soft oil to prevent it from opening except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then draw out the earwax with strong suction, as too much of that has been accumulated.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it's not forgotten in this manner, take alum powder or beeswax prepared with the tools where birds are pressed into a certain quantity, and place that on the tip of the cannula, and then cover that area properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert it gently into the ear canal with ease, and extract the ear with moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it's not forgotten with all the causes as mentioned before, you cut that area that appears to be an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that area is to first anesthetize the patient with the saphenous vein and extract the blood as per its virtue, then hold that scissors between your hands and turn the ear towards the openings, and make a small incision in the base of the ear at the spot pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the shape of a crescent moon towards the stone, and if possible remove the stone with appropriate instruments; and sew the incision at that time with speed, and heal it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grow and inflate, you administer the cure and its extraction; but if you do not take care at that time, you take thin spatula as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the aspiration of that fat which has grown in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do that when you think that it has already been moistened by the steam of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and extract it with onions or fine syringe, or make an incision as mentioned before, as the extraction is relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with condition at the beginning, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and squeeze over the affected ear where the water is, and if it's forgotten by that, that's good; otherwise, you take many sharp needles or leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them up slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into the ear canal and sneeze on the other side of that area and percuss the stone inside the ear with another needle.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop this with a stone until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been forgotten to such an extent that you take paper or gauze, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned at its tip.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another gauze and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and strain it with a cannula as mentioned before for stone removal.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the removal of animals that enter the ear, if it's small, you can do as mentioned before in the division; but if it's large and causes swelling at the front of the head, administer its removal with syringe and onions, and the cause of that is easier to deal with than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When extracting worms born in the ear, when treating that patient as you have said in the division and treatment of distillations, but you do not confirm your treatment, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Furthermore, if any cause of the worms appears, then extract it using some method or subtle means, but if no cause appears, then take a thin and wide cannula whose shape is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the distal end subtly into the ear according to the quantity that can be tolerated by the patient; and apply strong suction with it, and do this repeatedly, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient suffers from an obstruction, then you should close and seal the circuit of the cannula with wax as previously mentioned; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and observe the procedure in the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let your effusion be with which you infuse the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the base, with a small hole at the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so let it be shaped as if it is in the concavity of the continuous cannula here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the ray and cover its tip appropriately, then pour oil in the concavity of the ear (or juice from some herb, or any medicine that you want) into the cannula, which is in the ear, and insert the ray with a suitable angle and press it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil deep inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The oil that is to be infused in the ear should already have been heated slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you will be distilling in the ear is not too hot, because the remedies for the ear do not tolerate such heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of opilacion (earache).
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children suffer from ventricle inflammations of the womb that have not been perforated, and this can also happen in some men, an earache in the meat of the ear due to a wound or non-healing tissue there; and sometimes this earache occurs at the piercing of the earlobe, which does not heal properly, and sometimes it is located elsewhere.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	The one that occurs at the piercing, which does not heal properly, is in the greatest dispositions for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the one where healing is achieved, it is necessary that you clean the ear of the patient and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if obstruction appears in the ear, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	The spatula should have a small width at the end, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be twice as long as the ear so as not to harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the earache is due to born flesh in the ear or in its meat, then remove it with subtle means and cut off the flesh as quickly as possible until all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the earache is at the piercing of the ear, then take a thin ray and heat it slightly with fire, and place it in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you notice an obstruction with the patient's complaint of difficulty hearing, relieve the pressure with ease; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Place cotton gauze in the ear according to the size of the hole you covered with the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any substance and soak it in water and grind it into powder, using it as directed; and if the earache has already healed, it is necessary to remove the cotton and replace it with another gauze that you will wrap in cured fat (cauterized) until the abscess subsides; and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, submerge sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is discussed in the treatment of distillations.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athazel which enters the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazel that enters the eyelids of humans can sometimes be moist, but sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have the instruments to cut and remove them with an eyelid spatula, and place the eyelids back as directed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain accompanied by bleeding occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a thin linear cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is near the incisions and trophies that return when any cause remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyes of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings that have penetrated into the eyelids of humans are caused by something similar in strength and hardness to swelling, and because of this hardness it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation is that you examine whether the swelling arises from something that comes out of the eyelid and spreads all around; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision through the width of it, and carefully excise it from all sides with ease until it comes out, and suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the incision is not made ready for you and it cannot be penetrated with an incision, then do not notice any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitching; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, there will be no harm to you because the angue of it restores and fills it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is receding into the parts within the eyelid, you should treat the inner surface by evacuating the eyelid and suspending the swelling with a thread, another which you need for incision, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, do not notice any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And apply salt water to the wound, and care for the place until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of excoriations on the upper eyelid of humans.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excoriations that are gray and are generated in the tunica of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsen the eyes of those and lead to their catarrh, the most severe; and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears flow into them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Because of this, you often find them on their faces all the time, and on their faces when they sleep; and humid overcrowding covers the lower eyelids, which have already been inflamed, and signs of impending infection appear in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, pus is released into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and then you press a cloth on him and make it warm, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arsenic on all sides; and then place that on top of it and press with your fingers all around so that pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of the humidity with a spatula, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in lancing.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the case of children, it is necessary that you cut the cord entirely until you reach pus, because in more serious cases pus is released by incision according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the sides and turn it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to close the incision because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and scratch it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, but rather in the incision itself, then you should close it with a small piece until pus is released; and remove it as we have said; and submerge it in water and vinegar and place it on the place and press it with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so those that strain salt press it in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of the humidity is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an abscess at the cauterized place, you should treat it with plasters made of cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On ways of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of humans are born from the natural hairs and are old, you should touch the eye and make methods of diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelid that is called tactinir of the eye, and treat it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as was said in the chapter on cauterization; or by touching through incision and stitching; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; turn the upper eyelid towards your left hand, and if it is turned, good; otherwise, insert a needle into the side where pus is present below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the same side, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid in which the hairs grow — near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid to the sides, and turn it towards the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Approach the inner division of the eyelid, adjusting the hairs to make an incision in the lacrimal major and direct it towards the lacrimal minor; then extract the eyelash, place powdery cotton or cloth under the eyelid, press it gently, and apply a pledget (or pad) soaked with oil of myrtle on the eyelid, as if it were a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary that the shape should correspond to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies among men, for some of whom a large incision in the eyelid is required according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the incision is made along the natural furrow as thick as a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the onion in one of the two angles of the incision and scrape it all out, then adjust the edges of the lips with a fine woolen thread, wipe away the blood, and apply what remains of the hairs over the eyebrows to certain adhesive substances, if you wish to do so, but otherwise, do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Take care of the stitches of the hairs for three or four days and nurse it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound unsutured and care for it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is alleviated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better, therefore, according to the ancients, this is the way they used to treat it.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But on the patient, there should be vigilance, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of treatment is to apply myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and connected incisions in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to make the incisions, take an awl with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, then pass another eyelash near the lacrimal major, and the eyelash near the lacrimal minor, adjust them at their tips with equal length, and lift your hand with elevation of the same size as the drawing we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the edges of the wound with stitches and nurse it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs at your incision or your wound, drain it with cautery and apply warm compresses.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	In some cases, the eyelashes may turn into a cyst, so it is necessary for you to use what we said about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Cyst removal with cannulas is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you turn the eyelid inside out and cut the figure that I have described; then, using your craftsmanship, make two cannulas or fine tubes whose length is equal to the eyelid's length and width narrower than the width of the incision.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already made an incision at the ends of each division, where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Apply a thin layer of what remains of the eyelid skin over each division and tighten the cannulas of each division with strong compression, leave it for several days because the incision will die off and become denuded and it will gradually be absorbed until it falls off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, break the cannula with tweezers, and nurse the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, once the incision has been sealed, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not penetrate.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two cannulas that you will make as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	It should have the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On removing ingrown hairs in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When hairs that are not natural, hard, rough, and ingrown pierce the eyelid, the operation is as follows: Take a thin needle and press it gently on the eyelash of cedarwood and lion, then adjust the ends of it with subtle movements to avoid any damage.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the hairs should be as long as a palm (about five inches).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And prepare another thin thread next to it in a short time and cut off the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place the patient's head on your lap and position yourself facing the soles so that your work is clear, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair, which requires skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it over the natural eyelash.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull the hair upwards and insert the instrument within, let the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Pull your hand towards that which the hair is withdrawn and insert the instrument within the eyelid with the natural hairs.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the instrument is inserted within the eyelid without withdrawing the hair, insert it at the sides with the blade you have made on that side, up to where the instrument is withdrawn from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Look at it with your eyes, because then you will insert the instrument and the blade, and cut each and every hair, leaving the nails for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows back over it in good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too short, you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, raise it with that, or wait until it grows long enough to be raised slightly, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capital XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of cataract that appears above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When cataract appears in the eyelid and it contracts towards one side or another due to bad consolidation of plague or section or cauterization, it is called leprosy, and this cataract may be natural or accidental, caused by consolidation of plague or sections or cauterization, or resembling its poor healing.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of operation is to cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that dry it out, as if you do so, cataract returns worse than before and no time will be helpful.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of the causes that soften such as fenugreek, and wrap it with the water in which are crushed seeds of it, or gum guaiacol, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you perforate everything that is not yet consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned, is not just some correction of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is called cataract in truth; and it may be one of them natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental is caused by plague or section or cauterization or others similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operation is to take a needle with double thread and poke it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin to the upper sides with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise it with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, good; and if not, take the ray and place it in the slit figure, and turn the eyelid with that, and make two incisions along the lower edge of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the two incisions of the slits should be from two corners of the incision that you made, and their meeting angle should be formed where they meet, so that when they come together, the figure is formed with them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then cut away the flesh to the extent that it is the thickness of a lance from there, as far as the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then align the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; then care for those with what we have said of the softening medicines and hot baths until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you cauterize, pierce, or suture, then it is necessary that you make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with warm water between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the conclusion of this discourse on the treatment of cauterization, whether above or below, let it run in operation, as prepared according to the method of cauterization, and that form is in the shape of diverse dots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artificer always prepares an engine in every manner possible within his reach to restore the figure to its natural or almost natural form, and the patient according to the operation and tools in the greatest arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is fused above with the aqueous humor, and it is prohibited from easy movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you intervene on the outer edge of the eye below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it out with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And apply a thin scalpel to the adhesion, which is not sharp enough for incisions, having a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the scalpel without damaging the aqueous humor.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Let your incision be such as to remove the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And place salt water in the eye, with which you wash it, or distill it in a vessel filled with soluble sulfur dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid and the eye with warm water, place woolen yarn soaked in olive oil on the eye, and on the third day use consolidating agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of a nail and removal of skin around the tear duct.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two types: one is nervous and similar to hard, dry, thin tissue; or it is not-nervous, similar to congealed white moisture, which, when touched, or if it is pressed out, can be removed with oil and will not be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both cases, they do not begin until the tear duct above covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of working in the incision of it is that the patient tilts their head towards you, opens their eyes, raises the eyelid with your hand, and collects the nail with oil from a small container and extends it to the edges above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take a needle and pierce through a cow's or ox's hair or hide, or similar tough material, double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, and hold the nail; extend it to the edges above, and remove the hair along the length of the nail that touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you continue in this way with the hair up to the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And apply a thin scalpel or small forceps to the root of the tear duct, and remove the natural skin of the tear duct so that by incision of it does not cause continuous tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in some cases, the nail with only oil or grease can be extended or held, as we have said, and it should be cauterized with the lion's mouth scalpel, which is its shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane and causes a tear, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision in the eye a little salt or diced onion and leave it for another day; then care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it, nor can you apply oil, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and healed in the same way as we have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a thin lion scalpel with sharp point in this way:
am subtilitat.	with sharpness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is hardened and congealed and enters the root, then distill from your own onion, made of diced garlic or salted water, into the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And apply the operation to it repeatedly until everything is removed from it, unless a counter abscess appears in the eye, in which case you leave it and care for the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Approach your operation again on that matter until it heals properly.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The secretion of the lacrimal cartridge, if noticed by a large nuisance, should be stopped with water; and incise that from one side, and do not deepen the incision to avoid the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the lacrimal eye socket with sinus juice until it heals properly.
Capitol .xvii.	Kapitel XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Über die Inzision von Zysten und der daraus hervorgehenden Hautanwuchs im Ohr.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In den Ohren von Menschen, die an der Augenlidkrankheit (Alcus) erkrankt sind, kann man eine rötliche Hautanwuchs auf der Nasenschleide finden, die sich langsam ausbreitet und die Pupille bedeckt oder nahe dazu kommt. Diese Veränderung ähnelt einem Balusterrad mit festgepressten Augenlidspalpen.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Die Operation wird darauf erfolgen, dass der Patient sein Haupt auf deinem Tisch liegt und du die Ohrenöffnung offenhältst und alle Randschleier abgezogen hast. Du kannst sie mit einer Kraftzange oder einem Zungenausheber abziehen. Es ist wichtig, dass du das Augenhorn nicht beschädigst während der Operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Die Inzision sollte solange erfolgen, bis die gesamte Hautanwuchs entfernt ist oder der Spaten, den wir in der Nägelinzision empfohlen haben, oder kleine Scheren eingesetzt werden können, um die Schleier abzuschneiden, wie es im folgenden Kapitel beschrieben wird.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Da die Inzision kompliziert ist und die gesamte Hautanwuchs noch nicht entfernt ist, sollten Sie das Ohr mit Salz füllen oder in Salzpulver tränken, das einem des Korrosiven Medikamente ähnelt. Verweile auf dem Ohr, bis sichergestellt wird, dass es keine Sekundärinfektion gibt.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	Wenn die Ursache für Zysten noch nicht geklärt ist und es sich um eine Infektion handelt, gibt es den Verdacht auf eine Sekundärinfektion, dann soll der Patient das Ohr lassen und die Infektion behandeln, bevor Sie mit der Operation fortfahren. Ähnlich soll auch die Hautanwuchs, die bei dieser Art von Zysten auftreten kann, behandelt werden.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Es ist jedoch wichtig, dass der Patient die Heilung des Ohres natürlich oder unbeabsichtigt erfolgt, und Sie sollten nicht in irgendeiner Operation interagieren, bevor Sie sich sicher sind, dass das betroffene Organ den Eingriff überstehen kann.
Capitol .xviii.	Kapitel XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Über die Sammlung von Schleim im Ohr.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Der Schleim ist rosig gefärbt und schützt das Ohr vor der Operation. Lassen Sie ihn mehrere Tage entweder langsam ausfließen oder mit einem Tuch abstreifen, bevor Sie die Operation beginnen.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Es ist also zu Beginn wichtig, sicherzustellen, dass das Ohr, in dem Schleim vorhanden ist, nicht von einer anderen Krankheit betroffen ist und die Schleimflüssigkeit stark genug ist, um sie abzusammeln.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and support those veins with an inch or two seconds depending on your discretion; let that inch be of double sublimation according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	This translates to "and let that inch be gradually in one body according to this form:" The text seems to be a medical instruction manual, likely from the medieval period. In this particular sentence, it appears the author is instructing the person administering treatment (presumably a doctor or nurse) to support a patient's veins with an inch or two, and have that inch composed of "double sublimation" as per some specified form or method.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then gather those veins carefully, using fine forceps or delicate instruments, and clean the blood from them little by little, until you see that the veins are filled with blood again and become swollen.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful not to injure the vein at the end of the spatula; if your operation is performed during daylight, and you are firm in your actions that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed [the procedure], then you distill the green or red vinegar over the vein to dissolve what has been filled with blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you fill it all with what eases the pain from there, and let it rest for several days until the pain has subsided and been assured of being a safe abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then apply [the treatment] repeatedly in the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing arteries to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arteries with cautery or sharp medicine as described in the narrative and it is not healed, then do not deceive [the patient] but instead make an incision on the abscess when it is mature, extract all the moisture that is in there, and let the bone be exposed until it is dry.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp spoon, and it should be made of iron. The handle of the spoon should be rounded like a corkscrew that has been punctured for fine puncturing (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and carefully turn it with your fingers, pressing gently until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Let it [the spoon] be made several observations, and then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good flesh grows back, the body separates from the wound and remains for 40 days without being renewed or becoming an abscess, and no accident occurs there, then you know it has been healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, do not deceive [the patient] but instead reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and in this way: It is that you cut through bone or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces of sinew as shown:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The piece of iron should be triangular in shape, and its shaft should be extended to the end like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place that [the sinew] on the bone (the lacrimal bone), and extend your hand a little towards the patient's head, and turn your hand with the sinew until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient will feel it as if air is coming out through there.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and area have hardened, you return the material that had flowed from the nostrils to the nose, so it will be lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the skull.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the skull swells entirely without causing any harm or diminution, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down, and follow this procedure: place your hand on the skull without cutting and suction gently; then place a plaster over the skull made of opium, aloe, honey, and gum arabic, and strengthen the poultice over the skull with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of powders is that you take fabrics from lion's wool, and each fabric should be folded into four layers; then grind them to make powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that is needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply strong and firm pressure with the thick, tightly woven fabric; and alternately apply hot fomentations with suction without cutting, then remove the fomentations and allow the wound to heal for a day and a night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	However, if the ligament becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament for a day and a night as previously stated.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has reduced, that is good; if not, then continue applying the plaster with powders and tightening and fomenting until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the eminence of the uveal tunica.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and you want to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: You enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the side below, and put another needle through the double filament of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle in place according to its position; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift up the portion of the uvea around the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And remove the needle and place a cotton swab soaked in oil over the wound, until the filament comes out with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care of the wound with something that will comfort it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And after some days, place a circle of cloth around the entire wound and adjust it to hold the prominent part; then perforate it with a thin spatula that will penetrate into the wound, and run the humid fluid through the albuginea (white part) of the eye, and push down the eyelid and enter as quickly as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eye ulcers (Alconati).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called Alconati is not simply watery discharge from the eye, but something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	However, the method of treating it is that you make the patient lie with their head straight on the pillow, and hold their head between your two hands until you see the pus appearing at the lower part of the eye, and it does not descend or weep, but stays there; and let the light in, and the patient sees as they did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, know that it is watery discharge.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if it is not prepared to let the pus descend with what has been said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and feather over the palpebral conjunctiva around the cornea at the corona (near the root), until the pus is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is expelled, you distill the water in the eye with which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said what kinds of watery discharge there are and which one should be pierced according to the declaration given by the physician; then perform that one according to its health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make the patient lie on their back with their head hanging down, allowing gravity to help drain the eye.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand close to the eyelid of the eye from which the watery discharge is coming, whether it is the left or right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take your right hand if it is on the left side (of the body); or take your left hand if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then touch the extremity of the little finger near the crown (of the joint) for the thickness of the nail at the root from the smaller tear duct, and press it with force using your thumb.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then enter the nail bed and feel that the little finger has been pierced due to your action.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	You must measure the distance from the base of the little finger to the root which is from the iris to the tip, and this is the crown of the nail; for you will see the pupil with the image of the nail through the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then press the little finger into the water and pull it down once again, and if the water rises immediately, then the patient will immediately have a view of what is under their nail.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait for a little while; if the water has gone down, then you should repeat the action, but wait longer before pulling the finger away.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and the water does not go down, then you should extract the little finger easily, gently rotate your thumb around it, and dissolve a small amount of clear saline gem and use it to clean inside the nail; and afterwards cover the nail area with a cotton pad or stopper or infused linen soaked in rose oil and warm beeswax and glue over the nail.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those of our time press on that compress made with beeswax.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your little finger is hard and does not enter the nail due to its toughness (since some men have hard nails), then it is necessary for you to take the instrument called an alberd, which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, pierce that juncture (with the alberd), and do not damage your thumb in the process, and be careful to make a small hole near the base of the little finger.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the little finger as previously mentioned.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Make sure the patient's accommodation is prepared, with a comfortable bed placed in a dark room where they can rest on their back. Also, ensure that all movements are restricted.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Keep the patient in a stationary position for as long as necessary to allow their condition to stabilize, and do not turn their head to either the right or left side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Keep them bound according to their condition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then take them to that dark room and expose their wound, making them see the cause, and return their bindings on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is not necessary to perform this procedure during the hours of prayer or immediately before the application of an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Since it is necessary to drain the wound, you must do this because water can easily escape due to great and violent movement.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	However, if an abscess forms, you must uncover the nail on the seventh day and treat it with a substance that causes the abscess to subside.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then cover the affected area with a cloth and place it on the oral cavity so that its heat can be directed towards the affected area for several days, in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gradually remove the cloth from the wound and discuss its causes with the patient.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You should know that, in some cases, a disciple is not allowed to see the procedure performed; in such cases, you must be bold and perform the operation without showing it to the patient.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	We have learned that, in some cases, it is recommended by the author to make a fire under the yarrow plant (Achillea millefolium) before puncturing it with a needle and collecting the water that results from this process.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, it is not well-known in our land whether anyone has perfected this method, nor is it found in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is a new invention.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the shapes of the species of mandrake for one who does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of earth or iron specifically, and their extended parts have this subtle triangular shape with the pointed end being its form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitolo XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of dead flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various dead fleshes grow, one of which is similar to a scorpion sting or polyps (small growths) on the feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of these [growths], cancerous, crusted, black flesh; and it is not dark-colored lion flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of lion flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, you should treat the patient by seizing it between your hands and placing it under the sun, then cut off the nose where it grows, and pick at it with tweezers where the growths are.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract it from the front part and make an incision in what you have grasped with a sharp pointed spatula from one parting to where you know all the flesh has been removed; if any reason remains for which abscission is possible, then you pull out what remains with one of the subtle instruments with ease until there is no more cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However, if it is a boil or abscess that has come to the surface, you pause it with pus; or if it is a malignant boil, you cover it and cauterize it until it is abscised and all cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then pour vinegar or water into the nose at the incision site.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	However, if the nose is opened and moistened with moisture to the palate, then you know it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is dead flesh in the pus above the nasal bones, which has not been abscised.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should introduce a faithful probe with some thickness into the cavity where there is any thickening, and move it in and out, and pause between each nut to the size of a finger or a thumb, and examine the patient and introduce the end of the probe into the nose with the ray or other means possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since you have done this, draw the odorant in towards the nasal canals until it reaches its goal, and be careful to place it on your palate because many observed actions like this make children at school laugh, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two extremities of the probe, one that extends over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and bring the instrument for cutting flesh with tweezers from the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is with the probe's tweezers.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the probe and pause in the nose, near the drainage of pus, and do this for three days or more until the pus has eaten away all that remains of the fleshes.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, pause a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	However, if this treatment proves unsuccessful, use another method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument for a purge-maker who distills oils and medications in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or earth, similar to a small, open lamp, like a small pitcher, and the metal should be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tip of the instrument for the purge-maker should be flat, open; to which you will hold when you pour oil or any substance or extracts that you want into it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	The purges are as follows: a recipe for beaver broth, white bale, ginger, piles of saffron, long pepper, asafetida, and epithymium anacardium. Mix with juice of wheat and cabbage, and make them into pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and give it to the patient on their side.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitolo XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On teeth that have grown in the external parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Teeth that have grown in the external parts of the nose are observed and emphasized for several days until a molar is removed from its place.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And since it has been determined that you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and cut off all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the site or cauterize or apply a burning medicine where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	However, if its incision is delayed until it is emphasized, consider whether it is hardened, dark-colored, and has little feeling; in such a case, do not cut it with iron because it is an abscess crusted; as many observed actions like this bring great misfortune upon the one who performed them.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is lion-colored and not dark, and sometimes it can be drained completely, then drain the patient and incise it without fear, heal the area with what drains out and bind it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxvi." would mean Chapter 26. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The stitching of the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by ulcers or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not advisable to perform that operation except in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you have reached the cause of that [ulcer], consider if it is a fresh ulcer with its own pus, and then you adjust the two lips of the ulcer with stitching, and place it over until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity solution are already separated and each is healed, you should carefully remove each part of its edge until there is no pus coming out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with stitching and tighten them, and on top of them sprinkle dragon's blood powder (triturated), and place a patch of diaphyton ointment or another consolidating ointment on top of the powder, let it rest for two or three days, then remove the patch and replace it with another ointment and let it rest until the pus has been absorbed by itself, and heal it with gargle until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or add the solution of continuity with pus as I have told you.
Capitol .xxvii.	It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxvii." would mean Chapter 27. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of the causes that occur in the two lips on the inside cuts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often one finds hard abscesses in the inner cuts of men's lips that resemble fatty masses of pus, and some are less severe and others are more serious.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and cuts on all sides of those hard masses, and fill the abscess area with clean triturated wax until the pus is restricted, and it should be washed with vinegar and healed with an astringent water until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxviii." would mean Chapter 28. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Large abscesses often form on the gum where the flesh is adjusted (which the ancients called albulus). Therefore, you should suspend it with a rope or hold it with forceps and incise it in the correct way, and let the pus flow or blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place a clean wax or other astringent powder or healing powder on the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then incise it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxix." would mean Chapter 29. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for tooth loss with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surface of the teeth in the inner cuts and those on top and between the gums are adjusted with sharp roughness, scratches, and sometimes they turn black and become yellowish or green before there is corruption of the gum and the teeth turn loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, you should keep the patient close to yourself and hold their head in your lap, extract the teeth where those scratches and causes appear as sand before there is any cause left, and remove the blackness and yellowish and other impurities until they are clean.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that impurity is present at the beginning of the reason, it's good; but if not, you should repeat the reason on those same days until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have many requirements of various shapes and forms depending on how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore, because the razor for removing the tooth from the inner cut is different than the rasp for smoothing between the teeth according to other forms, these forms of razors should be prepared as you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	It appears that this text is a medical treatise and the numbers refer to chapters or sections within the treatise. So, "Capitol .xxx." would mean Chapter 30. However, without more context about the document as a whole, it's hard to be certain.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should take care to cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in the entire extraction of it because it is not a good reason for the swelling of it when it is extracted, because there is sublime substance before it is excused in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, when the patient is satisfied to extract that tooth, you should be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain because swelling often deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and the pain does not stop until the sick and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have already seen in the barber's operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, in order to identify the painful tooth and what you know about it, you must make an incision around the tooth where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gum on all sides, and then apply heat using tweezers or fine forceps, starting small, gradually increasing until you achieve this.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then apply strong, large tongs for good heat or structure, hold the patient's head between your hands so that he does not move, and carefully extract the tooth in a straight manner without breaking it and causing him additional pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If you haven't forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth with ease and force the removal in such a way as was done at first.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, you must wrap it in cloth and tighten it at the root with a thin wire to prevent it from being crushed during your compression with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	It is necessary to be careful with incisions around the entire gum and preserve your strength so as not to break it further and leave it in pieces, and return to the patient for the greater evil that may be worse than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their surgery and rashness during the extraction of teeth, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring great evil upon sick people, which are difficult to crush, and all or some of its roots remain, or you extract it with bones from the mandible in such a way as many times has been witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then clean the mouth with salt water before and after the extraction of the tooth.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If bleeding occurs due to this, such as in many cases, take some sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the fine forceps and tongs used to extract the tooth at first should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when using them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be of such a length that when you grasp them with narrow handles, they are not bent, but short in length.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron and correctly shaped with straight lengths, and on the ends of those, teeth should interlock and tighten by strong constraint, and in some cases the lengths of those should have a form like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is called a hook, and are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to extract a tooth that is broken, you must wait at the site until it softens for one or two days; and then insert the ends of pliers or tongs shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or hook, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external parts of them are made thin like a blade or an onion.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey this forceps or tongs, then you must be careful about the reason and cut through all the flesh and insert the tool called an osteotome (which is a small lever with the following shape):
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a short, thick handle that is not sharp to avoid being broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the incision is forgotten, that's fine; but if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: The first tool has a triangular blade with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second tool has a triangular shape with a thin tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you have helped yourself with this tool that has two slopes with the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other tools that I will mention for dental procedures; because this tool that resembles a large claw is also used, and its shape is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a curved or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not sharp to avoid being broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that tools for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Wise and skillful artisans, however, find by themselves according to what this operation signifies and the various diseases; for there are diseases about which ancient practitioners did not say or pause over their own instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, or if there are fractures, then weigh a cure over it in its place with what is appropriate for this purpose using instruments and forceps that we have mentioned earlier in the extraction of incisions from teeth, and help yourself with the following procedure:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	It should be done gradually, with some thickness, and held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or going deeper until the bone is completely forgotten; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then cut that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth prominences over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural shape, it is a problem, especially in women and the most venerable ones; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then you should root that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose shape is as follows: like the snout of a pig, made from Indian iron with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Your incision should be made in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not affect other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth requires grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It should be entirely made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be ground down gradually in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Approximate that line there at the end, and cut it with another razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If part of the tongue is cut off and the edges are rounded, then you must smooth the wound where the sharpness of that piece remains and fill it to prevent the tongue from splitting or the word from being distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital. XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	If the teeth are broken and removed by impact or extraction, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated them with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then for those that are firmly fixed with gold and not silver, because silver turns green and deteriorates after a few days, while gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the fillings should be made in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place double of it between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow with two twists (or more) between two damaged teeth, or if there is one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then place the tissue in the divided section where you began, and press gently with your hand until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your thread, with which you press the fillings, should have the sharpness of the teeth so that it does not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess filling with forceps or scissors and add it to each area with gestures, and bend them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And sew that area tightly like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, press it with another filling at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of the teeth and the configuration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as sometimes they are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or teeth are removed and returned to their original position in their locations, and they grow again as we have recommended, and become strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only those who are skilled and wise should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And in some cases, cattle bone is suitable as a cause for teeth, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capital. XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is found at the base of the tongue sometimes or naturally occurs in some people, or it may be an accident caused by injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, their head resting on yours; lift their tongue and incise the ligament nerve according to the width to the extent that the tongue is freed from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is hardness or callousness, and it is a result of an injury that has healed, then you throw vinegar and cut through it according to the width, until you have incised the ligament and removed the callous tissue.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And ensure that no gaping fissure is made in the skin and that you cut through the arch and allow blood flow to emerge.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the traces of incision with vinegar or with warm water, and then hold the tongue clean; this is necessary for the patient to keep his tongue clean every night to prevent it from sticking together again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is blood flow, place a vinegar-soaked cloth over the area; if it continues to bleed, then cauterize the area with a light cautery, which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And apply other remedies for the other causes until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes a small boil occurs on the tongue similar to a small blister that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and it is usually swollen within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure for this case is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sun and examine the boil.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is dark or black in color, hard, and the patient does not feel anything about it, do not touch what appears to be a cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is whitish with humidity, you put onions in it and cauterize it with a sharp blade from all sides; if blood flows during your operation, stop the flow using this vinegar-soaked cloth.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have removed it with satisfaction, and clean it with warm water and salt; heal it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of boils on the ears and those that are on the gall bladder and other boils.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When inflammation occurs in the gall bladder, it is glands that resemble a boil and appear outside and are called the two ears; if you treat them with what has been said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the boil is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation. If so, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; leave it alone until it matures, and then either you break it open or let it burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, round and the root of it is thin, it should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure for this is to determine whether the boil has rested with complete rest or has diminished in any way; then place the patient facing the sun, his head in your hands, and open his mouth wide. The servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument whose form is as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press the tongue with it and show the boil to you, you catch it with your fingers and put an onion in its hole and pull it out from all sides as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls some layer of skin is to incise it with the following instrument:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the arms of it are curved so that the orifice of one arm is in the center of the other, and they are sharp with iron ends.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, incise it with the following spatula whose form is as follows: Sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised the first boil, incise the other one according to this method of incision and apply warm water to clean it.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flow occurs, apply decocction of scorzonera or mirra root and similar to the treatment of scorpion sting until the bleeding stops, and heal it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes there are other boils on the gall bladder besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two boils.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with a boil that was born in her gall bladder, which was dark in color, had little sensation, and had closed the gall bladder of her own accord, and the woman was breathing with difficulty and had stopped eating and drinking water, and she would have perished within a day or two if she had not been treated.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The boil had grown so much that it erupted through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I cut it surgically and inserted an onion into one of the openings, pulled it out, and inserted another large piece, and then incised the other opening that could be felt from the first opening, and I held the mouth of it closed, compressed the tongue, and inserted an onion in the boil.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I made a large incision in it, but there was only a little blood flow.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the growth of that woman is absolutely abscess, and she should immediately begin to drink water, and apply pressure to food, so that it does not continue to increase due to that abscess for a long time, and an abscess occurs in its place, which will be healed until the previous one is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then boil the water and cauterize the growth of her, therefore be careful not to add anything more; and approach and do not know what God has prepared for it nearby.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This seems like a section heading or title, rather than a translation of a specific line from the text. It could be referring to chapter 37 in a medical treatise, but without more context, it is hard to determine its exact meaning.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a bladder that is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr of the bladder is abscessed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is in the thicker and rounded part, it is called a "bubble".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is cured with the water mentioned in the division, and you do not trust your treatment, and sometimes an abscess has already cauterized itself and is subtle, then you must incise the one that is swollen round; and if it is along its length and bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not centimeter-sized, then you must be careful with the incision of it, as there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, then you should squeeze the patient and press their tongue with an instrument used to shape its form and place the onion in the new opening, then pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of two moles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must not incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term without addition, for if you incise more of it, you will damage its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And before the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use an engine in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cautery in it is not other than with sharp water, and you should hold the head of the patient on your lap, press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take from the water that was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and fill a living cause with it, and stop it neither thick nor thin, and from that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the outer edge of the concavity in which the medicine is stopped be as deep as the concavity of a mortar bowl, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and let the patient cough over their own side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth passes through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the growth of it and heal it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine, and press it on the ulcer for about an hour until you see it become darkened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray into the cotton in a tube until the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as necessary for the cauterization of the grape, and let it dry for about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and clean the cauterization around the grape with cotton soaked in soap, wash it with warm water, and heal it outside with an embrocation, and internally with guargarisms until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is more dangerous than incision and cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is healed by subfumigation in this manner: take calm, hyssop, origan, rue, scicadus Arabicus, camomile, crushed and similar to those of herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; the pot should be well beaten with a suitable pestle, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hole, over which an instrument concave of iron, according to this method, is placed; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Let the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient up to where the steam reaches the ulcer until it is somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment for several days until it dries up, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, as it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather the declaration of cauterized abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	However, if this instrument is not available to you, take a reed and make a hole in the end of it so that the mouth of the patient is closed, since the cork of oil prevents steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On removal of spines and what adheres in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Observed motes or spines adhering to the throat, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract whatever is visible from there, on which you focus your gaze, since you press the tongue with an instrument only for that purpose, so that it may be made clear what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And whatever is hidden in the throat that is not apparent, you must make the patient vomit beforehand when the food has been digested in the stomach, because the adhered cause will be forgotten by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of nutmeg or radish or a dry piece of bread; or take a piece of sea sponge, dry it out well, and forcefully push it through the patient, since when it reaches the location where the spines are hidden, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Furthermore, take an eel and boil it well, then strain it; or take a sieve and put it over the pot, and press the contents through it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not those causes mentioned before are forgotten, then take an instrument made of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Let it be larger than a small one, and on its outer side shall have a concavity which you insert into its mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Lift its head upward and ensure that the tip of the instrument touches the bone from the throat, so that it pierces through the bone or the spine, or that the physician with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But it is better that the patient themselves enter it (the intestine), since they know the place of the related cause and cover it up from below, and then pull their hand with the instrument upward, all this depending on the amount that has been prepared before forgetting it.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of bloodletting attached to the goitre.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the goitre is treated with what has been said in the division of cure by medication and does not improve, consider then on the neck of the patient's goitre, since you have prepared the tongue with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the bloodletting, extract it gently and carefully with a small spoon or an appropriate thin tool.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the neck of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting dies and comes out from the neck) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a sponge full of water and open the mouth of it (the bloodletting) in that place, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any cause escape from there, and move the water one hour apart from another using your hand, as the bloodletting immediately senses the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument that you have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation of that (bloodletting) is that you take an oil in which the coals are ignited and cover it with a lid at its middle where there is a hole, and compose the end of the instrument inside that hole; and place it above the fumigation; and make the patient hold their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close their mouth to prevent the fumigation from being forgotten before you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting, since the bloodletting immediately falls.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, you should continue the fumigation many times and keep the patient from drinking water, eat salty foods and almonds, do not drink water, and in this way it is necessary that this treatment regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which goitre bloodletting is treated when it is visible, and it resembles forceps as often seen, except that there is some curve in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the goitre and whose end resembles a stork beak, which is lined with emery paper, so that when it captures any cause, it does not let it go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the whole sermon is on the opening and cutting of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many types, as can be seen in their recollection, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They are diverse in perforation and cutting of them through two methods, one for the species of abscesses themselves; and by that which comes from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is specifically for the places where bodily accidents occur, since an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the anus; and an abscess in a meaty place is different from an abscess in a joint, and to each of them there is its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	But some abscesses are such that they should not be perforated except at the ripening of health in them or at their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses that should be drained when they are hard and not yet ripe, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for an abscess found near a joint, its duration is prolonged until it ripens in the area surrounding it, and the pus spreads and corrupts the ligaments or nerves of the joint, causing contraction of the affected member; or the abscess is near a main organ, and if you delay its perforation for too long it may grow into the main organ; or it is near the anus, therefore do not drain an unripe one; and it is not necessary to drain a hard one, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not protrude and be prolonged to the areas inside the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or it may be made in the area near it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You must know when to perform the drainage of the abscess, and this is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the swelling and pulse are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes clear, and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And since you must drain it in the lowest place near the abscess, and allow the pus to flow out from the healing of the incision.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Drainage should be performed through the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the groin or feet, and in places where the ligaments, cords, nerves, or arteries are located; and finally, in all locations where there is a reflection; for in those that reflect, use drainage according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to drain it before its contents are confirmed as ripe, just as we have said; for if you drain it too early, the abscess cavity enlarges and the pus becomes more viscous and the edges of the abscess become hardened and the depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes an abscess should be drained according to the thickness of the tissue or body, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	You must perform a small drainage for small abscesses, and large and deep or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of abscesses where the cavity should be made concave and incised when this is done, it should be filled with bread and then closed again, such as those that occur in double or buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a three-angled section, and those in which an incision is made like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as abscesses of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which round or crescent-shaped incisions are administered, and similar ones.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But those in which the contents are not contained like surface abscesses, it is necessary to drain them with a superficial incision or only a shallow one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, drain it but do not rush to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, allow the abscess to heal for another day, then extract a larger part, and continue monitoring the discharge until it subsides.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is a fragile person, old, or weak woman, or a small child, for their vital spirits are easily dissolved by the outflow of pus, and they may die from it, you should be careful when performing these procedures.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when performing the drainage of these abscesses, be sure to clean the wounds carefully and consider whether the abscess wound is small or a shallow incision, in which case you can use some antiseptic; but if the abscess is large, and the holes made during drainage are deep, it is necessary to wait for each one until they all close.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the abscess cavity is excised or made concave in its circumference, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or thread made from fabric, such as when you use bread or cheese, without moisture; keep it closed for three days, and then clean and care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the operation, administer warm water and wine on a cloth to soak up the blood flow, and let it rest for a while until the bleeding subsides.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding continues, it is necessary to administer treatment and care and apply powders that have been recommended in many places of this book and other texts.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near nerves, it is necessary to cover powdered substances in oil and wine and let them rest on the affected area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the location is fleshy, it is necessary to let the powdered substance soak in warm water or oil and wine, and keep it moist until the third day as we have said, and then clean and care for the abscess until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here is the translation: "And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of universally occurring ulcers, but as I have already said about every ulcer in a separate manner, here follows the specific method for treating them individually by chapters."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Chapter 42. On the excision of ulcers that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small ulcers in the neck are of specific types that contain cysts lined with membranes; and these are of multiple types.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them [the affected areas] come blisters, and of those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those [the blisters] come blisters with moisture similar to powder and resembling them; and from those [other blisters] are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section [of the body] and in the removal of those [blisters], there is no fear, as the extraction of those should not cause counteractive archery [complications].
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section [of the body] of those [blisters] is to use an instrument with a shape that comes close to this, which is called scissors, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	But if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with the section [scissors] according to its length along the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the section along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, as too many observations return if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with that and leave it until another day, as with this the corrosion will affect everything that remains of the skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on that wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then cut it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with the section having a crooked shape, and make an incision between the two lips of the section and cut it all around, and exert your force in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your archery [procedure] causes counteraction, then do what I first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And do the same in the lapidated abscess with section and care as I have told you; but sectioning a lapidated abscess is easier, as it has less blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have none of this moisture; the cause is that I made an incision on an abscess in an old woman's head as hard as stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would inflame [the area].
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental abscesses of the head, this is not applicable, such as abscesses that occur on children's heads and you should loosen their ears, but the section of all of these should be a surface incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part [of the body] to alleviate the pain in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then care for those with what is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, ears, and throat; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are usually those that arise between them, and the entire scrofula of these is their own membrane, as with nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are nodes, as some of them are hard, some contain moisture, and those that are malignant which do not respond to care.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one which you see with good position in the Touching, whose color is similar to that of a pigeon egg and is malignant throughout, and is not connected to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery [sinew], and is not protruding, it must be incised with a surface section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body, along line G to line B, cut it all around, and separate two lips of the scrofula with scissors or small scissors as necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it gently.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to be incised the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, which does not adjust your hand with incision or disturb the patient, and which incises what is not necessary to incise; as if you were to incise a vein or archery [sinew] and forbid yourself from operating, the wound will become inflamed or irritated, and you should stop the wound with vitriol plaster or other powders that cause bleeding, tighten the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened and turns into pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask the patient if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If the abscess is of the great vein in case of scrofula, then it should not be incised that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then press it firmly and let it fall by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill the wound with old lard which you have already smeared with Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you sew the edges of the wound as soon as possible so that no unnecessary fluid accumulates.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you notice that there is excessive fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the root of that, draw it out, provide stitches and treatment as prescribed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation in the area where the maturation of the tumor is visible to you, and stop the perforation with a dressing made from the base of the body as we said before.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And provide perforation, with oil and similar substances, in order to dissolve what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you notice that the wound has been cleaned, treat it with meat-based ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the scrotum in case of an apostematic abscess (hydrocoele).
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this incision on the scrotum, and I have never seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the teaching of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with hernia, the incision of the scrotum should be avoided, because it is not beneficial for the patient, since all the veins and the major vessels are located there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses or hernia or two aurelhas (hydroceles) where the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to make an incision of the scrotum to avoid the danger caused by strangulation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when it is desired to incise the scrotum, make an incision three or four circles from the circles of the scrotum, or a smaller incision along its width in the area between two circles according to the quantity, and the incision should be made in the tissue, not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of bleeding from it are hidden.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is poor, he should extend the string of the hydrocoele one inch and make an incision in the string to reach the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if possible due to any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And make an incision in the area of the canal as we have recommended; this refers to the section where the flaccid part comes out, which is the part that was detached and due to the abscess of the testicle.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for a certain period of time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the time has passed when perforation is feared, take two edges of the string of the wound and sew it only without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And provide medications that make the flesh heal until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the entire teaching which we have recommended is nothing but veins that some of these abscess patients have already drained the hydrocoele of the patient, and the patient has died, and his anus has been cut open, and others go to incise the epiglosso (epididymis) so that the patient breathes through the wound area for some respiration, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, command that the wound remains open until the disease of the illness is consumed; and this is the disease for three days; and therefore, command that the wound be sewn up, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my experience is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his scrotum and made an incision in one part of the trachea, and I was called to treat him, and I heard the death rattle as is the case with the dying, and I discovered the wound and stopped the bleeding that was coming out from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were confessed that it had not incised a vein or guiding, and the wind came out of the wound, and I treated it until the wound was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant if there is no wound in the testicle, and another few days return to improve his condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now tell you that in the incision of the scrotum there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision over an abscess that occurs in the scrotum outside, and is called hernia of the scrotum.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	The abscess called hernia of the scrotum is a large abscess according to the color of the body and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accident (mishap) occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fatty nodules, and the other resembles an abscess caused by the knotting of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is necessary to make a presumption (diagnosis) with caution only in the case of small ones.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine that and investigate it as described, and if it appears similar to fatty nodules, not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it in a similar manner as with other nodes, and extract it with water containing soap; but if not, you should carefully explore its entire nature, and place care over the area with something that is suitable for treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter forty-five.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the cutting of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of nodes, there are many species, and I have already said all their species in the division (classification).
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary to distinguish between a node and an abscess as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain until the ebullition of excess subsides; and it is a complete rotting that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node does not contain heat or fever or pain; it contains a cystic lion that is in the sack itself (cavity).
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and is made in the same way as a vesicle (blister), whether large or small, and they are according to two species, for they may be fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are multiple, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you should expose it and examine it at its beginning with a probe that is called "intromes", according to the shape that will come as in the chapter that is close to this (one).
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of examination for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it in the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate your fingers a little at a time until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand at the end according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what comes out as evidence of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture (pus) is forgotten, no matter what color it is, you should incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the evidence of the probe there is no moisture, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry it over it with the incision having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, hang it up and remove the capsule from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sack (cavity) over it if possible, and extract the pus from that with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract it healthy, and you should watch for any signs that come from it, and then you should extract it in pieces until there remains no cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains a cause, whether little or much, the node will return again according to its nature (character).
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders (antiseptics) and strengthen the wound, and place care over it that is suitable for abscess cauterization, and treat the other with another treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, you should cut both lips of it (incise it) and treat it with something that encloses (heals).
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it or not, you should catch (ligate) and fill the area with zinc tristat that is vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the wound can be closed and stop the flow of blood; and then return to incise what has been broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-six.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the shapes of the probes necessary for cutting and perforating.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these, the shapes of the probes for incision are threefold: there are large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium-sized probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of the small probe is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let them be made of iron, of wood, or cut at the ends well, for a good fit in the abscesses (boils).
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the shapes of experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it consists of three ingredients, of which one is large, the other medium-sized, and the third small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The method of a great experienced one, prepare as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The method of a medium-sized experienced one, prepare as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of an inexperienced one, prepare as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary that they be applied to abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and boils because among those are caused by bones or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Make them round, large, and lion-shaped, like large needles with which the edges are sewn, and they should be made of lead, iron, or silver, And the best are those made of lead.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experienced ones with black feathers place them on the cavities of the fistulas, which are reflected back to the source by their lightness and the reflected images.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it consists of three ingredients: some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its tightness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Recipe of a great experienced one with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Recipe of a medium-sized experienced one with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Recipe of a small experienced one with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The recipes for the onions are of many ingredients, some of which are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them are wild onions, and they come in three varieties.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of the wild onions, some have two curves, and there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onions with three curves, and there are three varieties.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary for their use in the procedure.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Recipe for a large simple onion:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Recipe for a medium-sized simple onion:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Recipe for a small simple onion:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Recipe for a large wild onion:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Recipe for a medium-sized wild onion:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Recipe for a small wild onion:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Recipe for a large onion with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Recipe for a medium-sized onion with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Recipe for a small onion with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Recipe for a large onion with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Recipe for a medium-sized onion with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Recipe for a small onion with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the recipes for scalpels with which they are cut and scraped open abscesses and boils, and there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Recipe for a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Recipe for a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Recipe for a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The incisions made with these are sharp and the other incisions are not, and they should not be done haphazardly but rather with care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve during the scraping of the abscess, and for this purpose, the patient will heal quickly and achieve a small amount of peace through the cauterization of the boil.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the recipes for plasters, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	Recipe for a large plaster:
Forma de magda migier:	Recipe for a medium-sized plaster:
Forma de magda pauc:	Recipe for a small plaster:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They should be made from lead and resemble glass with which alcohol is also made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	In the incision made with a pointed instrument hidden and along its edges, proceed to divide it both inside and out as desired, just like when you are sewing.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of needles, which should be hidden during the piercing of boils and not be felt by the patient, come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the recipes for them:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of bellows used to extract the blood flow, and they come in three varieties: large, medium-sized, and small. The recipes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	The text states: "They are made of citrus, round with some length, and they are subtle." (In modern English)
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It states: "You should make incisions with great, medium and small ventous bandages, in such a way that through them blood flow is quickened when necessary, and at the start, not medicine." (In modern English)
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as in the armpits of the thighs and chest, and underarms, breasts, stomach, loins, and similar to these, the fleshy areas humid. (In modern English)
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some (bandages) are made of those small tools resembling fish scalpels in this manner; through which blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or an artery. (In modern English)
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some bandages are made round in this manner:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter xlvi. (In modern English)
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Treatment of male breasts, which resemble female ones. (In modern English)
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some bandages should be inflated to the breasts of certain men, and they must rest as if beginning to become hairy, and inflate the breasts, and make them resemble female breasts, and we leave them attached, but separated. (In modern English)
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who has that (inflated breasts), it is necessary to make an incision with a lunar section as follows: from line B to line G, and remove all the growth, apply a plaster of carnation-colored medicine, sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it heals. (In modern English)
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast descends towards the groins and is softened like in women, then it should be cut into two parts above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, of which each one should be contained within the other so that the major line contains the minor line as follows: from line B to line G. And remove the cyst located between the two lips of the wound, clean the area, and administer what has been mentioned about stitching and powders until it heals. (In modern English)
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to be made due to the patient's distress and blood flow, then you must plaster the wound with a soft cushion submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until it dissolves the tissue that is rotten, and then treat it until it heals. (In modern English)
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter xlvi. (In modern English)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from below the navel. (In modern English)
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses that come from below the navel are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus sac. (In modern English)
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section as follows: from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, you must cover it with soft gauze and leave it for another day. (In modern English)
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And the gauze should be left on and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals. (In modern English)
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes is or scrofula, then you should cut it as follows, as has been said in the section on scrofula. (In modern English)
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended in such a way that it exudes pus, then administer cautery as has been said before. (In modern English)
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter xlix. (In modern English)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incision of abscesses that occur by arteries or veins. (In modern English)
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the pus sac that is on top of it is consolidated, then multiple bandages occur as abscesses. And the signs by which it can be recognized that inflammation and abscess are from an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an artery, it is usually long in the front part of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor. (In modern English)
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	The one who is swollen due to a vein returns (or goes) to the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If incision on this abscess is a mistake, and more so in the areas without hairs (such as the armpits, genitals, neck, and other parts of the body); it is severe, therefore its cure must be avoided, and if it is in the external parts or at the head, it should be prevented.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	However, on the one who is swollen due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, cut in the long incision along the spine; and then open the incision with scissors, and then cut the artery, and free it from the layers until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place an awl on it and make the awl penetrate through the other layer, and compress the artery with double force at two locations—which causes the pulse to cease in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then prick the location between the ligaments with a lancet and let all the blood that is in it flow out, until the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicine that generates heat until the ligaments dissolve, and then heal it with suitable medication until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to incision of a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and with your other hand press the surrounding area, and then insert the lancet into the same area that you are holding; and let the thread double through it until you extract the blood from the other layer, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts at both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the needle into the whole abscess first, and tighten your four fingers around it.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Cut the abscess in half through its middle until all that is inside it comes out, then you cut away the excess surrounding tissue and leave what remains attached.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Place a plaster over the place where you have immersed it in wine and oil, and then administer the medication that is made with heat and moisture until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	The first capital (case) of an abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and vein, as well as in nerves when it occurs due to trauma or excessive labor, etc.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is usually found in the locations of joints or ankles, or in any location where the joints are harmful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The abscess is severe, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the larger of these locations when it is constricted with violence, causing the patient to feel like they are in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The abscess is not aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore the surrounding tissue is left intact, and it is harmful in all parts and does not go to the sides or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those who are in the joints, it is not necessary to be wrapped with iron, because a strong blow will lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, the surrounding tissue can be pierced with a lancet in the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the abscess is small, then cut it open with scissors and remove it by incision.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then hang it with hooks and excise it, and then close the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Case 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The twelfth case (capitulum) of an abscess that occurs in the belly due to a hernia.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It is necessary to press and examine the bellies of those and other parts of the body of those whom they are called "funguals" due to similarity with fungi, whose root is subtle, but its head is large; and already the lips of these are turned over, and it is small, and it is greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, but there was no difference between the white ones, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and remove one weighing 18 ounces. And the other that weighed 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider if the patient is moist and the color of their wound is white, moist, and of subtle nature; then you shall incise it with a lance, and there should be cautery in your presence in the fire, because many observed veins should be expelled without blood; and if blood comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is weak and afraid, do not incise with iron; but take a leaden file recently made, and press it against that wound, using the method I have mentioned; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the leaden thread; thus, you should press the large piece of lead against it until it is detached and falls off by itself without labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if it is of large size, there should be some cause for fear and fear in the incision of it, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it may be possible for you to incise the thickness of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not incise a wound that is of black color, of little sensation, of regular appearance, because that is an abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And remember the crab coming near to this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of the eminence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is made for many causes; either by fissures of the abdomen that which is above the stomach and from there the tissue or intestine comes out as it does in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or an artery, as mentioned earlier, or by constricted windiness in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to the rupture of the abdomen and discharge of tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and it may appear in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then place that in position with the method I have mentioned, but with much greater diversity; and when you press that with your fingers as I said, it becomes hidden, and it tends to return; and forceful heat is there, and it must be intensely bathed and vigorously treated.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to moisture, it is less painful and does not become hidden when pressed with the hand, nor does it become constricted or compressed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to blood, the abscess will appear with these signs, darkening in a descending manner.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if due to dead flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it is packed according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if due to windiness, the touch of it is less painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation there is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness; in such a case, you must be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and fear as I have taught you in the chapter on abscesses due to an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to the intestine or tissue, you must command the patient to lie on their side and remain extended; then apply pressure in the entire circle around the navel, and command them to stay facing between your hands and to press firmly or gently in the circle of the navel over the area which you have marked with the probe; and stretch out the thickness of the abscess at the sides upwards with a large incision; and tie it in the circuit with strong thread or cord and the method of tying is decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the said instrument there to reach the intestine; and if you have not found or guarded it with the ligament, then you must extract all the contents and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the tissue, you take it with a large incision; and cut off its excesses from there.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, you must circle that and return to your operation; then take two needles and put them into the strong cords and insert the needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, as I have mentioned, and strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the skin may stretch out and fall off by itself; or incise that when it has become thinner and may be pulled, and then heal that with what is necessary for the ointment until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the eminence of the navel is due to dead flesh in it or moisture, you must close the abscess as I have said and extract the blood or moisture, which you leave there, and then heal that with what is necessary and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of crabs.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have said in the division, of the species of crab and in what manner is the treatment of it with medicines, and that it is dangerous in it to cure it with iron because it should not be ulcerated; and I have said that crabs are generated from filthiness and caution in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancient ones said that sometimes a cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as the skull which is located in the breasts or in the chest and resembles those of the limbs designated for extracting all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it becomes old and large, one must not be too eager to attack it, for I cannot heal of it nor have I seen another who has, nor that it has been achieved by anyone.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in that place is when it is designated as such, that you precede and allow the patient to rest and purge black bile several times, and apply cautery to it, if there is a clear indication of inflammation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and forewarn him about the cutting tools that are required; and ensure that all sides are concave with a good sewing kit, before any reason for the pain remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Allow the blood to flow, and do not incise it lightly, press the places, and wipe the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can use of the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is against your will to incise thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that immediately until the flow of blood stops, and take care of it with other care until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 47.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of edema.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the types of edema caused by water, and the signs of each type, on the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type that is treated with iron is only the one type of edema caused by jaundice, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of tympanites or hypostatic edema, as that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of tympanitic edema with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient has already become debilitated or is suffering from another type of edema such as in the throat or abdomen like those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, as there is fear over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient in good condition and he has no other disease than edema alone, and is not a child or an old person, then the method of operation for him is to lift him up with your hands and make him lie on his back, expose his abdomen with your hand, direct the water from the part below the navel towards the opening outside, and take a spoon-shaped spatula as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	and is sharp on both ends like a spoon, but is of some short length, so that in the operation with it, you do not enter the intestine, and hurt him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the production of edema is from the intestines, as then you must be at least three fingers below the navel on the right side above the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the production of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side below the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the production of edema is due to spleen disease, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is necessary that your incision be above the ribs where you want the patient to lie so that fluids do not accumulate at that location frequently.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the entire skin with the instrument and enter into that incision, lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and the abdominal cavity and scoop out that fluid; and if a thumb's width or more is present.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the abdominal cavity up to where the spatula reaches the location of fluid.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take out that fluid and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or latten leather, at the lower end of it there is a small incision, and on the sides of it are three incisions: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is cut off in the manner of a quill, like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a band, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately disconnect it from the instrument, evacuating the water in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will likely die due to resolution of his animal spirit, or the purgative effect which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the strength of the fluid and according to what the signs of the patient's pulse and his condition indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it, as it should be immediately stopped by the skin that closes the incision which you are recommended to pierce in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to leave too much water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient and let out a large amount of water from them, then cure that one with burial in hot sand and stir it up with a stick, and wait by the sun for a long time; and cure that one with drying medications until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Burn on the stomach, and the spleen and pouch near the removal of water, according to what I have reported in what came before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened urinary locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or it is too narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform perforation on him immediately after birth with a thin probe according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And tie a small leaden peg in place with thread, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and return it afterward.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not remove the lead, there is a possibility that the urine will not be able to reach this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But one with a narrow perforation should be treated with a leaden peg, as mentioned earlier, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, those in whom the perforation is not in its proper place, it must be led out (since one of them, the one that was born with a perforated anus, cannot urinate at the partition within, until he raises his anus with his hand to the partition above; and this is not for generation, because semen cannot reach the mother according to proper procedure, and it is a serious illness).
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grab the head of the anus with your left hand and pull it out violently, and cut the tip of the head of the anus at its perineum with a sharp probe, as when cutting a feather or any part, so that the meconium of him resembles the head of the anus and falls into the proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Be careful in your blood flow operation, because such things often happen; and pause when you find that the blood is flowing, and cure the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 61.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Swelling that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, caused by inflammation, discoloration, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Swellings that happen in this area on the penis are inflammations.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these swellings, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The non-malignant swelling should be suspended with fine thread and cut into it until it is completely removed; place your hand over the affected area with warm Egyptian oil, and apply that for a while until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, of a dark color, then it is necessary to administer cautery near its incision and to treat it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the swelling is on the uncircumcised foreskin of the penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, it is necessary to remove the inner swelling first until it consolidates; then treat the outer swelling, because when you treat the outer swelling at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also swelling and discoloration occur in the genitals and foreskin, so it is necessary to evacuate everything that has been spoiled or is about to be corrupted or already corrupted; place a line made of honey, which has been coated with flour made from milled barley and ground walnuts and crumbled almonds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a discharge of blood, administer the following method of cautery:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cautery is useful in two ways at the same time: for stopping blood flow and for treating an ulcer when it is spoiled.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in those cases where the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to ulcer or abscess), it is necessary to excise with a blunt probe until the pus is resolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to desire that area, it is necessary that you excise the foreskin and head of the penis with any cause, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has been softened in warm water to prevent it from adhering again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And let it be treated with strong wine until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 71.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous cure like other diseases: however, since it is our operation and our will, and the loss of that part in children is necessary, it is essential to assign the best possible operation and way for their salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and it was only adopted later through experimentation, which caused most craftsmen and barbers to use a new knife and torches; they used oil and an incision made with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found a better method of circumcision with scissors, oil, and the nail, because many times the skin is damaged more than necessary, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains behind, and it is easily punctured again and certain pain occurs.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the method of circumcision that is performed by a scalpel and is manual, used by shoemakers, is not guaranteed to make an incision at the tip of the male organ, because it easily injures the tissue within it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation of the nail, beware that you observe the iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The baby's cloaca is short by nature, and it often expands in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the modification with forceps and sutures made of thread, the goodness, I have discovered through experience, for forceps are proportionally incised, therefore the sharpness that is above is similar to the sharpness that is below; and so when you press your hand proportionately with two sharps, and make an incision in accordance with a comparison at a certain time; and it causes compression of the suture thread with a shape containing the cloaca of the entire area, with which there is no chance of error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down more, especially if it is one who understands a little, and do not do anything but put the forceps in the child's anus only, and let it rest for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make him happy in all the manner that is possible for you, according to what he understands.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make him remain among your hands prepared, and not be scared; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any of the other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then enter your hand into the anus and inflate the cloaca, and pull it in so that the head of the anus is outside, and then modify what has been added to it due to constipation.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then fold the marked area with the forceps and tie it with a small thread at the bottom; then take hold of the first suture and pull it out with good tension, and incise between two sutures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the cloaca slightly and strain the head of the anus; then let a little blood come out slowly, for it is better; and pause powder on top and over the powder place a cloth in which has been spread mustard oil known as hog's lard in warm water; and leave it there for another day; and care for it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps used for modification, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One should not be sharp on both ends and the other should be sharp, with the handle of the claw not exceeding their length, and the length of the two blades equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in modification is that too much and excessive force is exerted on the cloaca internally, or a part of it should not be incised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must extend the cloaca from your side with your nail before the incision and make the incision equally.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with forceps and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has been three days and the swelling remains at the anus without incision, then you let it go in so that the swelling is cauterized and excoriate it with ease, and make the incision as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Take care not to cut the head of the anus, for that will not help.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, cure it with what the plague is consolidated by the powders that you have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the cloaca is incised too much and the edges are observed above, that will not help.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But cure it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression caused by stones or congealed blood, or by poisons or foreign bodies, and similar to those mentioned in the division of treatments.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not resolved, and there is retention due to stones that are already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on his thighs and extend his stomach from the area above his hips, and the patient should bend as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is compressed to force the stone to pass through the area behind it, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not resolved as mentioned earlier and the cause is very serious in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called syringe, the shape of which is: It should be made of silver and be slightly concave, similar to a goose quill cannula with the thinness of a long ray about the size of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a narrow tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of expelling urine through the instrument is to take the forceps and insert it into the wool or cotton with good lubrication; then place the forceps' arms in the area behind the syringe, and incise with forceps if any cause requires the cotton, but insert it into the cannula with vigor. And then advance the syringe little by little and with a bead and oil of hog.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Wash the patient over the bed (or couch), wrap the bladder of him and the penis in wet oil (or liniment), olive oil and egg yolk.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Insert the probe gently into the urethra until it reaches the bladder; fold the penis over at its root and push the probe in there; then push the probe into the bladder and let it pass through to the patient's bottom, ensuring that the probe is not turned aside from its course, but goes straight into the bladder.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then stretch the patient's foreskin gently with a small amount of wool, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove that and use the linen for healing the urine, and use a probe, do not stop until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the bladder has an ulceration or abscess, or blood is congealed in it, or there is a hard stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in it, then do so with an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if it is blocked outside, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three breaks: two on one side, as can sometimes happen.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, there should be a depression where you place what is to be injected, according to its quantity, without addition, until when any cause is drawn out by the humors, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is long, as happens in battles at sea with a clampcedra which contains naphtha.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	To prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of a cloth into the moisture, and pull with the water that is pushed from above, since the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the cloth.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here is the continuation of the sentence to translate:
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin clyster that bladder is clysterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Make the catheter out of silver or copper, with the tip resembling a small feather and the canal curving inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Take the bladder in motion and stop it where you want to clysterize the moisture in the bladder, then tie that moisture between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the tip of the clyster into the anus.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then hold your hand over the bladder with the moisture and structure so that the patient feels when the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate the entire circumference with a strong needle, and then insert the needle strongly in those holes so that it rotates; and add water to the circle as you do with an ointment container, stopping when you reach the moisture you want, oil and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie it in the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and press your hand inward until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of stones and their cure with medications, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have mentioned the stone operation with the hand and sectioning (incision).
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they are explaining it with clear and brief exposure.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly occur in children; and the signs of this are that the urine that is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; and the patient scratches his genitals, and often passes blood, and he is dressed; and with this he pushes out the feces.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from this is generally achieved before they reach the age of 13; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people it is more likely to occur among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	The larger the stone and the easier its cure; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we approach the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to clean the patient with a cautery which extracts all the wound that is in their intestines; for that wound sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, you must investigate its location.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet and ensure they are flat on their back so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder or sometimes jumps from its location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then have that person's bladder area prepared and the patient's legs spread apart to make the entire bladder area decline towards the sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then pierce it and completely empty it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the area, then cut into it immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel the entire stone with your touch, it is necessary that you anoint it with oil on your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are older, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then pierce the stone that is inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn it bit by bit into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your hand and expel it outward through the sides, away from the location where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to press on the bladder with their hand; command another minister to extend their right hand over the thighs and with their left hand raise the lower part of the back, in the area where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert an instrument like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut the space between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, towards the left side; make the incision over that stone and your hand should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the amount of stone that can be removed at all possible, but not too much, forcibly compressing your hand in the anus, which presses the stone, and this should be done without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that from a stone there is some part that has angles and edges, which makes it difficult to extract it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that (stone), there is something similar to a lion's head, round and easily extracted.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's the part with angles and edges, align it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it's not like that (round and easily extracted), then you must find a way to deal with it, or you should grip it properly, the end of which should be similar to a file against the stone, and do not lose hold of it; or introduce a thin curved instrument into it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot deal with it, then widen the crack a little, and if you see blood flow, cauterize that with triturated vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand into the bladder opening and slide inside it; then insert a small instrument close to that; and proceed similarly if there are multiple stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance is that you insert it with a large incision, because one of two things happens to the patient: either death or continuous urine distillation, due to which the location is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the expulsion from inside before it's forgotten, or use forceps to break the stone inside and extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloeswood and dragon's blood juice, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a piece of cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and warm water, over it, to ensure that the pus is cauterized and can drain.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And place the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bindings for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when it has been loosened, bind the area with warm water and oil, and nurse it with antiseptic and diaphoretic remedies until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if there is pus in the wound that has become cauterized and corrosive, like when blood is frozen in the bladder (and this is known as urine retention), then insert your instrument into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains, it causes bladder inflammation and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with any antidote appropriate for it, using remedies suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the healing process, you must check and adjust the medications that have been applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the penis meat, and there is also urine retention, treat it with the remedy recommended before achieving a section, as prolonged use of this treatment is accused of causing a section; and I have already mentioned this, and it's that you take a perforator with an iron handle, which has the following shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, set in a rod or tube.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And grasp the scissors and use it to cut the penis away from the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the iron rod into the penis, perforating it easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand in the small stone gradually, and you will perform the perforation of it until the other side penetrates through; because the urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And press your hand over the broken part of the stone from the side of the penis, because it is crushed and forgotten with urine; and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then grab a pair of scissors below the stone, and another pair above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And cut through the penis at the location between two veins.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And loosen the bandage and remove the blood clot that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need for a pair of scissors below the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other bandage above is not necessary, because when the scissors are loosened near the edge of the stone, the wound heals again.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And because of this, when you loosen the bandage above, you must raise the wound edges, or you must return to your task, and the wound will heal again as I said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of those [areas], then the cure becomes difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one who is most affected by it is a woman, especially if she is old.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you will not find a woman who knows how to discern whether she should show herself to the doctor if she is chaste or one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with the knife.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location for cutting on a stone in women is long from the location of the stone, therefore it requires deep incision, and therein lies fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is skilled in this, and she must be experienced.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are deprived of that one, then you should seek a skilled and discreet woman, or present an experienced matron knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who has partially mastered this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So present her and command her to do everything that you will tell her, from the examination of the stone to the beginning; this is because she must observe whether the woman is a virgin, in which case it is necessary for her to insert her finger into her vagina and search for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find her, let her go without her finger, and then command her to incise it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, with her left hand on the bladder and good understanding of it.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find her, it is necessary to gradually guide the catheter from the bladder opening towards the part where its virtue reaches the spot and brings about the recognition of the stone.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then you should incise the spot of the matron's hand and recognize the stone from any side it is located and center the stone in that area, but the finger should not be withdrawn from the catheterized stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert the blade into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to its size, as you know the stone will be extracted from that location.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are pebbles; some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have many sides.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many types there are in order to identify what you want to indicate.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see blood flow, adjust in the location of the catheter and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare the instruments that I have mentioned for the removal of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is due to the bowel that is incised, then stop powder on that spot and close it with plaster and stricture dressing, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for a strong blow may kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And take care of the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the flow of blood has subsided after several days and the spot has dried up, then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for strangulated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A strangulated hernia is not something else but an accumulation of moisture in the white belt that lies beneath the abdominal muscles and contains the bladder, and it is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some times it is in the small intestine which nature prepares for itself in the part of the bladder, until it is cut and becomes another bladder; and that is the white belt containing the bladder, but it is not really so.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has moving colors, for the color of it is either turning to yellow or blood-red, purple, black and slimy, or white and watery, and it is that which is most harmful.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is: for if it is in the white area that we have mentioned, then the abscess descends, turning red around at the base in such a way as a figure of an hourglass, and the genital area appears, for the humidity contains it all.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the groin area, then the abscess descends at the hour and from this it is estimated that it is another water.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the groin and the white area, cut it from below at the centimeter mark.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To know the color of the humidity, you should express the color of the humidity in the abscess after it has been cut open, and according to what is found inside the abscess, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and sometimes empty the body of it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then lay something on top of his back for some reason a little higher, and place many cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then set yourself to the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on his right side, who will extend his arm from one end to the other from the groin area to the division of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the groin area from the middle point towards the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision in a straight line, evenly spaced from the line where the pubic hair should be, until it reaches the white area encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, observe, and keep yourself for this so that you do not injure it; and your excision with which you have excised it by the division should appear suspended in the hourglass shape and subtly scrutinize the excision according to the quantity as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the swollen white area with a wide puncture and drain all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the labia majora and labia minora of the incision with stitches, and extend the white area to the divisions above; and do not touch the groin area, and pierce the white area in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Pierce it completely or in pieces, and especially its thin side, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it carefully, it is not assured that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the water proceeds from outside the cavity at the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the white area, return it inside, and then sew the two labia majora and labia minora of the groin area with sutures, and care for it in this way as for other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you find the water corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you remove the vessels that are the supports, and drain the water, and care for it as we said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water accumulates in two divisions it is known that they are hernias; therefore incise that division as you have done in the other evenly; and if it seems to be an operation to you, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you abstain from blood, and enter into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or unscented oil; and place another wool that you have immersed in wine and oil over it, and expand it over two groins and the navel area; and place above cloths folded and powdered, and lie them over it according to this pattern:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fill them with carmine-colored wool according to this pattern; and the extremities that are pressed by hand or wet wool should be secured with structure in the sleeve of the shirts, and one of the extremities will take hold of the buttock towards the back, and the second will take hold at the division of the pubis, and two extremities on two thighs below and two others on two legs above, and the entire structure should be adjusted in the sleeve of the shirts.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you take a subtle surgical cautery and make an incision in the groin area, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white area containing the water is uncovered, and then you take another cautery according to this pattern:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is shaped like the Greek letter "Σ".
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Approach and pierce that blister, and burn it until all its moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then remove the blister with tweezers, excise it, and cauterize it with a fine burning tool; incise as deep as you can until all is excised; be careful not to let the fire touch the surrounding flesh.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Know that this operation is slow and safe with little bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an abscess at the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you must treat the cause that prevents you from doing so, with treatment as needed according to what has been said above.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horribleness, then perform perforation as recommended; and it is when certain that you, according to what has been said about the meaning, that the hernia is harmless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must position the patient over some raised cushion, pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a lancet and let it drain, then stop the draining by pressing on the area for as long as the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the incision wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then press on the area and hold it closed to keep in the remaining water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is obstruction of the water in that moment when you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white pus in the orifices of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the discharge of the water, then you must put a medicine or tool into the wound with which the water is removed from the abscess, whose shape is specified; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small cup.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Know that the water returns and is retained for about two months or more; when it has been retained, then it should be perforated according to the aforementioned method, as the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this hernia there is great risk of peril in the larger preparations; for which I recommend dismissal and being saved by the better option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that and the characteristics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses arise in bodies composed of genitals and are caused by various reasons: either by acute aggressive fluid accumulation in the genitals, which is poured into them, or by trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the abscess depends on the body's color, and it is not observed in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A flat abscess is leprous, whose color is dark, and it does not have an opening.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some swellings are caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by inflammation of them as a result of which their memory is recalled, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is due to inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when it is pressed with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is due to inflammation of the vein is not dispersed by any cause, you must press it with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that incision may be performed on this type of tissue and on others; and you should incise the ligaments of the genitals, and hold open the wound above, and remove the white pus, and release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligament that you release from all parts of the wounds of the flesh.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the wound has already been consolidated, then you must extract the pus and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for some reason of the abscess or between vessels, then you must release all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is the natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of it and extract the pus as previously stated.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and care for it with other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is due to a rupture.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vitz is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a scrotum with the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to the reason which was previously recalled.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to perform the operation according to what was done earlier.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Say that it is necessary to position the patient over a raised cushion; and then spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the sides; and then take hold of the ligaments of the genitals with your fingers near the base of the scrotum, and have another servant extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Approach and make an incision with a sharp spade across the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Peel off completely from all sides as you said in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert into it a double-edged needle, and let it be inserted at the first place where you find blood, and then withdraw it in the second place.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Approach and make an incision in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the foul and rotten humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Approach and treat the wound with other remedies for the wounds that are intended to heal, in order to prevent the vessels from becoming infected by one of the two genera, because it is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if blood is found in all the vessels, it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that the testicles become blocked by the vessels, so as to deprive them of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels and to make them shrivel up, or be blocked for no benefit to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of internal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia occurs due to a separation that extends along the cephace (diaphragm) over the abdomen from the angles of the stomach's mirror, so that the intestines of that breakage extend to one of the intestinal sacs.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be either of the cephace or outside it, and these two types occur for various reasons: blows, falls, shocks, loud noises, or due to elevation from some serious cause, or similar circumstances.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this (rupture), when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms within the hernia near the preon (anus) because the diaphragm presses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this (rupture), when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, is that at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and an abscess appears different from the nearby proper anus, and that is precisely due to the intestine; and the body of it extends beyond the edges of the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, the intestine is forgotten outside, and this internal hernia is called zirbal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes it is made with ventosity (introducing air), and sometimes it runs in the intestine fissure and is retained there, and this is a grave danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes painful swelling and especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species (types) of this disease, fear arises, so it is necessary to avoid hunting (surgery) in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for that (procedure) is to command the patient to push the intestine with their hand towards the inner parts of its cavity, if it returns, then lift up their hips and place a cushion under them, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles towards the inner parts, and make an incision through the entire cord; then insert your fingers into both labia of the section as much as necessary to cut the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section, according to what is possible for you, can be forgotten (lost).
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then excise those areas which are the root of the spermatic cord, until the hard white core of each side is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white core and where the cord is located, and separate it from the tissue surrounding it in the area behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take hold of the spermatic cord at the front of each side, and with your left hand pull out the white core, lifting it to the incision site; and order the assistant to stretch out the testicle and dissolve the adhesion behind it using a suitable solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look for the cause of the hernia that is not covered by the hard white cord.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then remove it from the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a sharp point made of five fields (of metal), and insert it from the rear end of the white cord, which is below the spermatic cord and section; and then cut off any protrusions that extend beyond the fifth field, and collect some of them on a piece of parchment in the shape of a cross; and tie it with strong thread from both ends to the cord that we mentioned earlier is located below the spermatic cord.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And encase the ends of the fields and tie them tightly with strong thread, so that any vessels that may be affected by this procedure do not transmit any cause for an abscess or cautionary action.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then wait for three days after the first stitch, and at this time loosen the second stitch, leaving a space of the size of a finger next to the white cord located below the spermatic cord; then cut away all the remaining tissue in a rounded manner, leaving only the testicle.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision in the area behind the spermatic cord, following the section from which blood and pus will flow as we have previously recommended.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and wait for it to dry; and administer the stitch that we have recommended (and sometimes the white core is cauterized, as previously mentioned to prevent bleeding from flowing, which can happen frequently); leave the stitch until it falls out on its own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the wound heals slowly, then apply hot water poultice and wait for it to dry before removing it as previously instructed.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And care for the wound with other methods of wound care until it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On scrotal hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is no need for surgery with iron instruments.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The ancients believed that the hernia caused by fluid was treated in this way as we have previously recommended in the case of water-filled hernias; which is to tie vessels around the section with ease, and then squeeze them gently in the surrounding area where the abscess is located, until the vessels burst.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Care for the wound as previously instructed until it heals.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that occurs in ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, a fracture occurs in the ankles as we have said, and here is what should be done.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give the genitals any cause for hernias in the genitals; and if it happens, that is little; and return it to its place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time passes and the hernia does not return to its place by itself, a slit should be made in the scrotum before the hernia can pass into the scrotum; this happens due to the extension of the scrotum which is located in the ankles as we have said, causing the scrotum to stretch out and become soft, and then it should be closed and sutured.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its treatment is with a cautery as previously mentioned.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient bites on his two hands between yours, and then the area of the wound caused by the abscesses is dried out by cutting off circulation to that area using a ligation as wide as three fingers' width.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tightly bind the white scrotum under the codpiece until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then grab the penis and place it over the area in question of the scrotum, and press on the abdomen at the same time.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then sew up the two areas of concern on the tip of the penis with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the tip of the penis and do not open the scrotum completely, nor should the hernia bulge out, nor any other cause as you know in treating intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat the wound by curing the ulcers, and when the intestines are exposed, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the scrotum contracts and the bulging area of the hernia is not closed.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened due to this reason, because the tissues between it are softened and its care should be taken.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who treats it to make the patient lie down on his back and incise the entire scrotum, which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew up two lips with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and make a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the stitches; and treat any other wounds until they heal and the intestines return to their place.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but since I remember it in this book, its remembrance is necessary only in two cases: the first is when the doctor needs to know about it if he is interrogated on the matter; and the second case is because we sometimes need castration of other animals for our benefit, such as horses, cattle, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by incision with a cut.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When castration is done by strangulation, the method of operation is that we should restrain the animal in hot water until its genitals become soft and lined up hanging downwards.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then grab them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In a castration done by incision and cut, you must have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the scrotum and incise over each hernia with one cut until two hernias protrude.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those which you will remove.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those parts of the scrotum, but only the thin part which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation lightly reduces any cause for the testicles in the animal to desire coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	The hundred and twenty-first capital.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Title: On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In males, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears in a person with an undeveloped scrotum containing both testicles, where there is a structure like a female vagina covered by skin.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some cases of this condition, the urine is found in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is another special case: it is that the vagina is like two male testicles in size, with a little less than half of their total length, similar to male genitalia and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three types: two for men and one for a special case in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to incise the affected tissue and close it tightly to prevent the infection from spreading, and when you treat that area, also take care of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second male case where there is urine in the scrotum, neither treatment nor operation should be performed on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Title: The Twenty-first Capital.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Treatment of ingrown nails and thickened skin due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	An ingrown toenail that is pressed in due to natural causes should be trimmed and cared for regularly; and in some cases, it may become enlarged in some women so much that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	After that, you must remove the excess ingrown nail with your hand or scissors.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut too deeply, especially around the root of the nail, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of that area until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is flesh that grows inside the mother's womb until it is born and swollen lees are formed outside the vagina resembling caul (and for this reason some doctors call it "cauda") - so it is necessary to incise and care for it in the same way as ingrown nails, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Title: The Twenty-second Capital.
De curacio de alratica.	Treatment of scrofula (scrofula is a type of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes).
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Scrofula is when the vagina is not perforated or narrowed.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by disease that has occurred before, and it can be due to the growth of excessive tissue or by subtle or thick cysts.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It can be caused in the root of the uterus, in the costa (ribs) of the womb, in the upper or lower abscesses of the body, and you must avoid sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, as well as prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The detection of this condition is performed by the midwife, if obstruction is visible, it should be palpated with fingers; but if it is not visible, you must look for it using the touch or the ray (a tool used for internal examination).
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If obstruction is due to subtle cysts and is near the two labiae (lips of the vagina), you should probe it and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you must place your fingers on both lips of the vagina, and then gently feel for any abnormalities.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread apart and her knees bent. Then gently stretch the labiae apart, using force if necessary, until the subtle cyst is broken, and the obstruction is alleviated.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take cotton, dip it in oil, and place it over the affected area to keep it moist. Frequently apply warmth with a cloth and man (hot water bottle) for a day to prevent the incision from healing too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the cyst is large and thick, it is necessary to make an incision with a lance or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is caused by a tumor, then suspend it with a string, and cut into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are the medications which stop blood flow without biting, such as opium, dragon's blood, and henna, bound in oil of alum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing too easily.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and apply heat to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Let it heal with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes it happens in the major birth of other meats, and then it is necessary to cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is an abscess of crabs (hydrocele), the abscess of crabs, which is in the major one, should not be opposed to iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red piles that happen in the conchus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of large veins, from which a continual flow of blood proceeds; and when hemorrhoids are old and have turned into ulcers.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and I will say the same about those that receive treatment and those that do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers in the womb and do not appear to the senses, then no cure with iron should be applied.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifices of the womb on which the sensation is obtained, are those that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a hot bath and apply heat on them with linen cloths or sharp fabric, and cut into those places with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powder on those places to stop the flow of blood from one of the non-biting powders such as opium and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And bind her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then prepare a decoction of cumin and coriander seeds and gallnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take barley flour mixed with honey, wine, and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on the buttocks of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two bellows, and to the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and dip it in the juice of colandre or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier and wine, and apply it to the place; and treat the place with gargles until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if linen cloths that are of harsh observation are sought, then cut what appears to you from it according to what I said in the previous chapter.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of accidental hernia in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses happen in the womb, such as tumors, abscesses of crabs (hydrocele), ulcers, ruptures, and fistulas hemorrhoids, growths, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already said about these diseases and the species of those and the signs of those, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	It is necessary that I say in this treatise about abscess cautery which occurs in the womb when it comes from one of the abscesses that have been healed, and if you want to know what method is used for its operation with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with beating and trembling and fever, and sometimes it becomes inflamed and if you can feel that, then do not perform a perforation on it, but treat it with water that helps with maturation until the symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make the woman lie down on a bench with two legs; recline her on her buttocks and place her feet at the widest part of her pelvis, spread her thighs, and place her hands on the sides of her neck, each one in its appropriate position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And follow the midwife in the correct direction and administer the tool to open the orifice of the womb, the shape of which will come in those cases that it will be necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, you must place yourself on the right side of the womb of the woman, and what enters the womb from the instrument should not be more than her womb and the hand of the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than her womb, then it is necessary that you place powder on the texture of her womb so that the introduction of any instrument into her womb is forbidden.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you wait for the fluid to run out of the instrument from above and that the person administering the tool rotate it until it is opened the orifice of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the perforation appears, it is touched with the hand and squeezed, then it is necessary that you close it with a probe made of linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is drained, then you should stop at the wound and plug it with a cork dipped in red oil or any other oily substance with some thickness; and plug the incision on the mother's prepuce with a wooden plug.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then you should press down hard on the mother's vulva and soak a clean wool in water with ground mallow.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then allow the wound to be treated with a decoction for about two days, since it is necessary that it heals completely.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Sometimes the mother's vulva and wound are washed with water, honey, and milk; and also with water in which is ground up radish or long-rooted asterisk, and then return to the treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is deep inside the mother's vagina, then you must be forbidden from treating it with iron, having recourse to the care that we have mentioned earlier.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur unnaturally, according to the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife first recognize the figure of natural childbirth by certain signs, and when you see the woman exerting herself at delivery and desiring to smell the air, and she is relieved by whatever is on top of her during delivery, and hastily delivers the afterbirth, then you should know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the afterbirth above its head, and the second one either on top of or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen be pressed so that the afterbirth comes out easily, because if it descends onto its head, it will give birth to the second one; and it should be cleaned with good cleaning methods.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if it is another kind of birth that is unnatural and not acceptable, because when the afterbirth comes out on its feet and the body follows its head and its feet, and one hand is on it, or at the foot (i.e.,) or it is coming out with its head and one hand, or on the abdomen, and it is forcefully turned over its neck, resembling those unacceptable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to avoid mistakes and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And now we shall show all the figures of these, and explain what technique is used in each figure, and what it means and signifies.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus comes out on its head through natural expulsion and it is difficult to deliver, and the woman is exhausted and weakened by it, then perform this technique or what women have, and evaporate the membranes of the placenta with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife should insert her small sponge between her teeth and split the afterbirth, or cut it with her nail up to where the moisture inside it comes out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus is delivered.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be washed with egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a spatula.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command it to be washed, wash it with warm water and soap, and make it vomit on its own; then open its mouth and nose with one hand, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them gently little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then the woman should be placed on a chair and her legs raised up, and the chair pushed against the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall forward from the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then you should cut them and remove the rotten part of the fetus or take hold of its body with a cloth and remove it with equal force, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Delivery of the afterbirth on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out on its feet, then you must press them upwards, and turn it into a small ball, and grab hold of it, and pull it gently.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if it is inside the vagina, then you should command it to come out, and make it vomit on its own, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then you should gently return the fetus into the vagina until you stop according to the figure of natural delivery, because it will soon be forgotten with a slight movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do everything that has been recommended, then take alum and soluble gum, grind them well in the mortar, and apply a line of this mixture on the woman's cervix, below her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then immerse that cervix in hot water until the hips relax.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the birth passage becomes softened, then perform subfumigation of myrtle and pause it (the woman).
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	After one hour of subfumigation, then you shall immerse it (the woman) in a pan, and make her strain and extend the mouth of it (the perineum), lift it out, and press the lower part of the vagina gently against the lower belly to expel it quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Thus, you shall do this on her hands and her shoulders.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When it (the fetus) is expelled in this manner, then you shall gently push her hands little by little into her; and the woman should be lying on her back, with her legs hanging down, and they should be on a mattress, and complete the delivery.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press gently on her belly little by little, and extract whatever is between the legs up to where it (the fetus) is prepared for delivery from the lower vagina.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not expelled quickly, then take her legs and move them violently, and press gently on the hips little by little until the fetus reaches the vagina above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gently push her hands and draw the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Thus, you shall do this (the delivery) longitudinally on one of her hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If you can reduce the arm (of the fetus), do so; if not, lift the woman and have her bear down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot bear down, lay her on the mattress and strike her hips with violent force, and administer to her the liniments that I and recommend for lubrication.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	When the labor has begun, you shall make an incision on a pan, and study the reduction of the arm; gently draw the fetus according to its natural position, and have her strain and press on herself until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Thus, you shall place the fetus on her back with her arms spread wide and the opening of her pelvis at her mother's waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife must hold the fetus by its feet and gently turn it little by little until it comes out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it (the fetus) is delivered and turned, pause over the cervix of it with the oil and lubricant that has been recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command her to push little by little, and when she has done so, make an incision on a pan and command her to incline to the right side, and also command her to press; and have her strain with effort.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared on the left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	If the afterbirth comes out from the mother in this manner, consider it; then make an incision on the second nipple with your nail until it is drained of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging from the face and neck of it, then make an incision on its navel to prevent it from being retained and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently push the fetus into the vagina until it comes out as far as possible, and command the woman to press herself several times; it will be expelled easily if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born at intervals, and sometimes there are three or four, but this is rare and suspicious; however, it has natural causes, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count the number of placentas, even if they are multiply, as one; separate them by cutting the ligament at the navel of each one; some placenta may be expelled easily naturally, and others may be expelled easily unnaturally, as has been recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and reach the stage that has been mentioned regarding abnormal positions, then treat them as recommended in the above sections.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and makes what helps ease, speed, and subtlety, and is slow, and is skilled in every figure as prepared by the art of healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts (miscarries).
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes a woman experiences one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten and even more pregnancies in her lifetime, but it must be confirmed that a woman has aborted or miscarried six, while another has all ten, which was caused by the measurements of the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is necessary to know in the science of midwifery that a strong loin has a similar appearance to gout, and therefore it is useful for this purpose.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 66.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of a dead birth.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a stillbirth with the remedy that I have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it has not yet been extruded (from the womb), then you must consider whether the woman is of good virtue and not one of those afflicted by any of the circumstances in which death is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be laid on her left side on the bed, with her head turned inward and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife should hold one of her legs or tie them together on the bed to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the stillbirth.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and the mucilage of althea and fenugreek and seeds of both.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then you should anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand into the mother with ease, and then find the location where the fingers can enter the stillbirth.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And then consider if the patient's head is ready for what is to be done there; and then you fix the nails in the heels of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the collarbone of him, or in the places proper of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the treatment is for his feet, then in the pit of the arch or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary that the nail be held with the right hand, and bend its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and enter the hand easily and fix the nail in one of those places which have been mentioned, until it reaches the desired effect.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and fix another nail or the third one if necessary, in the vicinity of him, to attract it within and not extend it according to its length alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Let it be good all around, so that the symptoms of him are alleviated thus as is done in tooth extraction for its removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	It is necessary in him that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of him is retained, it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully enter those areas and rotate those that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the birth is forgotten, the nails are to be pierced into the place that is deeper; and do this until everything has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then a cloth must be wrapped around it; and extract it until everything has been expelled, and incise it or in the joint of the hand or the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you should do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of him is large or there is constriction in his symptoms, or if water has been adjusted to him in the head, then enter between the fingers sponges with thorns and open the head and extract the water, or dissect it with an instrument named "alundat", whose form will come among the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that is related to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if it is a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to dissect it with an instrument such as scissors, or take it with an alundat as has been said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extended and constricted at the neck, then it should be cut through until the humidity that is in the feet is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and there is no excessive swelling, then you should cut the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen is exposed or is edematous, it is necessary that you pierce it until you drain the humidity that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if it is on his feet, the pull of him is light and the direction of him to the mouth of the mother is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, you must extract him with a cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut the abdomen and feet until the water that is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are separated and the head returns, the midwife must enter her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, she must enter her right hand into her vagina, seek the head with it, and draw it with the fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and place a nail or two nails in it, and draw it out with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to an ulcerated cautery, it is necessary that it not be torn; but rather you should administer a liquid ointment.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and follow the patient in warm waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on his side, if possible, pierce it: and administer what has been said in the case of a live birth.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It is necessary that no cause remains within the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your work, then administer what has been said about the healing of the cauterized ulcers that have occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is bleeding, then you should stop it with styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the womb who was dead, and immediately above that fire another one was observed burning, and it is the birth of another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him far in advance that he had an ulcer at his navel; and it swelled until the fire erupted, and then began to leak pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to his care, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound was not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong adhesive plasters over him, and extracted a bone from him, and after several days, another bone came out; and I was very surprised, as there should not be bones in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you consider that they are from the dead bones.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you think about the disease, and extract from it small bones that exist in its female positions, and live in such a manner for a long time, correct it by a small amount of arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should not be surprised if it seems strange, because in that is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor uses his hand to administer as treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract it.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a trepan with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a strap-like strengthener in which the tendons are bound, to which binding there are two advantages at the ends of two cords.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this advantage should be more subtle than a tourniquet, and it should be made of either silk or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And each rod should be two fingers wide and the edges of both rods should be one finger wide, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods are two adjustments of that meteorological rod, which have already been fastened, whose length is the width of one palm and slightly more, and the width of each is two fingers, or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are interfaces in the mouth of the mother for opening it with those when you turn the prescribed advantages.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form resembling that one, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make a splint from wood or ivory that resembles forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it, add such extensions as are sometimes necessary, and the length of these extensions should be one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, do this: place a woman lying on her back with her feet hanging off the edge, open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then place your hand on the instrument similar to forceps, adjusting the amount as you examine the mouth of the uterus so that it fits snugly without causing any harm.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method of turning which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing, which is called impelling:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of amisidation, which is called the big head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps at the end, as sometimes necessary, and occasionally it is made long like forceps according to this form, as sometimes necessary, at the end of which are teeth similar to teeth on a saw that are inserted and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The method of premature amisidation (or small amisidation):
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The method of the uncia with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The method of the uncia with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The method of forceps with teeth for crushing the baby's head:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The method of the spatula with two ends for separating the head:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The method of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are practiced, and when more are prepared, their types should be multiplied, as it is easier for the artificer to work and according to the number of people involved.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing these instruments, because their necessity is not excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the afterbirth (or second child).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the woman to push it out, and have her strain as needed, and then place your hand on its opening and on its nose, and if that does not work, that's fine.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that does not work, you must take a cloth and perforate it with a probe and place it against the opening of the uterus, as needed, gently and roughly, and anemone and camomile and Arabic senna and cassia wood and sweet-smelling herbs.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the waves, and place that one on fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then insert a hollow tube made of cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it so that the steam goes to the concavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make that vomit in this way as we have said, and the second one is ignored with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if the healing remains close and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or mastic of althea, and enter it into the womb and seek for the second one, and when you have found it, take it out a little at a time, but if it is attached to the cervix, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it bit by bit, so that the womb does not contract violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is important to bind both the right and left ribs comfortably.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it in the amount of traction, because she will obey and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is narrowed, we have already recommended healing by vomiting and steam treatment with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it has not been expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then guard against forcing it out through abstraction, but rather let what comes out of it to the mouth of the uterus be taken care of by a woman, and anoint it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; because it will make it swell for about 3-4 days and dissolve and expel it.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it becomes swollen, it is raised to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from it; and then they must be administered sub-fumigation and appropriate remedies for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But one of the ancients has already been mentioned, the sub-fumigation of nasal tortoise and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Make an instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated to stop the retention of menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The wound may be treated with glass or silver.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the thin extremity be placed on the cinders and the thick extremity above the fire, and the subfumigation should be applied to the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that which is consumed by the subfumigation be removed, and apply another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When a newborn infant is born with an unperforated anus, treat it gently and apply oil.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife must pierce the said cyst with a sharp instrument, and if it is not possible, pierce it with a sharp probe, ensuring not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then cover it with a piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it internally when necessary.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is concern about oiling it, then let it rest for several days with a tube inserted, and stop it when the child wishes to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And now oiling of the anus occurs for consolidation of a boil or abscess, so it must be incised, and let it be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for the fistulae that follow.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulae that occur following a delivery, with a purulent and thick discharge, are to be treated near the anus or in the space of one of the divisions.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if the boil is old and turns into a foul-smelling white or subtle purulent discharge, and sometimes these fistulae penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these that penetrate are recognized by what is expelled from them through discharge and by fevers; and sometimes the patient uses an evacuation method, and it is beneficial to expel worms from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulae penetrate into the bladder or into the muscle of the vagina, and they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the neck of the uterus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known about a fistula penetrating into the anus or not penetrating, is that you place your finger in the anus, and try to probe gently with a metal rod or iron in the fistula, but be careful not to hurt it.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is danger in it, then insert the probe gently into the fistula with lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel it and do not perceive any cause of evacuation, worms or fever as mentioned before, then understand that it is not penetrating, and seek treatment for it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the muscle of the vagina, its signification is undoubtedly that it is urine from there and prohibition against using any medication at that location until the area is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or bone and there is pain in the surrounding area, its signification is that the probe enters the bone if there is no danger in doing so in the bone, and the pain is in the surrounding area of the delivery; and that pus often results from it; and that medicine does not work, nor is it consolidated by taking medicine orally.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulae is not a cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and futility of foolish doctors over which they remain fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the non-penetrating one that is not old, cure with iron is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your legs with his back raised and you raise his legs upwards, the thighs should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron into the fistula if there is no danger in doing so, until you feel the tip of the probe.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around his waist, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrating by itself in your finger, or if you feel something hard between your finger and that cyst or tissue, then you know for sure that it is penetrating; and do not work on that one because it is not a cure as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some people say that it is healed in some men sooner or later.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which healing is hoped in that location is that you ignite cautery of appropriate thickness according to the size of the fistula, as I have said before, and introduce it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; then apply it two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistulas that resemble the feathers of a bird's quill have been cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And treat that with calves wrapped in bandages until all the tissues surrounding it heal, and treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate tissue, and if it heals, then it is good; but if not, it will not be cured at another time by other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the affected area is within, but does not penetrate into the anus, and there is a tentative opening covered with skin or cyst-like structure and sometimes a fistula on the surface of the coccyx, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula. You will see it dries along with the tentative area, and cut the tentative area to reach the place where the tip of the tentative penetrates, and through the tentative it is freed and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then, clean the fistulous tissues resembling a bird's quill pen and ensure that no cause remains in them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow occasionally arises between you and your action when dissecting those tissues, then use millet and a gentle instrument for cauterizing with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire is suitable in two ways: it coagulates the tissues properly, and it helps drain the abscess by drying up the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat the area covered with bandages or dressings penetrating up to the elbow, and then treat the wound using tough meat poultices and let them heal and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medications are astringent and drying, when applied the wound is restored and healed, and there will be no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has penetrated into the rectum and is extended to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the anus and investigate it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore, if you find the tentative tissue and it is covered with skin or flesh, and is nearly ready for penetration, then do not operate immediately but rather by faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in one of three ways: or cauterize that as mentioned before; or cut it out so that you can achieve the cavity's concavity which allows you to enter easily and treat it directly, without causing any injury to the bladder, and avoid cutting too deeply because you may injure the intestines incidentally upon the patient without their consent; and then treat it with water as mentioned before for quick healing; or stretch out that covering and clean the pus that has formed inwardly close to the anus, either with a sharp instrument such as a tentative or another pointed tool, and then clean those fistulous tissues in the section where you can do so by pressure; and finally, force yourself to heal the entire wound through cutting and if the orifice is not consolidated, the fistula remains open at the anus and it becomes easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	At times the fistula ends in this manner: when you insert the tentative into the fistula near the anus around the surface of the body with the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated tentative like a prepared core needle according to the following method:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and penetrate the envelope of the five fields or around those fields, then insert the tentative into the fistula until it achieves the concavity of the area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if you are penetrating at the edge of the anus deep inside, then you extract the thread from that hole and insert your finger into the anus; extract the tip of the thread and adjust its two ends, tighten each one, let it sit for a day or two, and when the thread becomes embedded in the flesh more, tighten it to such an extent that those tissues between the two ends of the thread which are caught are cut.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, make it penetrate using any method you prepare, but not in the rectum because that is not for you to do as it may injure the bladder; and make it so that it heals.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of the spiny spatula to cut the fistula is such that its curve is sharp on one side and concave on the other, so that it does not injure anything unnecessary as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where blood flows in their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either they are like charcoal within the anus or they are as fatty growths.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small or large, and blood flows from them constantly and is one type, or they are many and are outside the anus, and at its ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those outside the anus are in months of little moisture, which produce clear water or a small amount of continuous blood, and their color is according to the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is within the rectum is to command the patient to sit and to squeeze it until the rectum relaxes, and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you grab it with tweezers or whatever tools you have available and make an incision on it with your nail.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if tweezers are not available due to the humidity and softness of those hemorrhoids, then take them with rough cloth or a net or woolen thread, extract them using your finger nails, and then incise them and sprinkle some caudal powders around the incision as an alternative to cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And approach the care of each one separately until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not obstruct evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite and wash it with water that is in the stomach and gently stimulate evacuation when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external from the anus, find their cause and press them with your nail or oil, insert them, and approach their care with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The person who you have inserted (the hemorrhoids), must receive suturing in the following manner: take a faithful envelope and insert it through the needle and bring out the hemorrhoids at the incisions above, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and enclose both external parts of the envelope in the upper part beyond the needle, and hold them tightly; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, knot the envelope, and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all (the hemorrhoids), but leave one and do not sew it, so that the excess blood can drain from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Place a cushion on the anus soaked in rose oil or wax, and place it on top of the patient and tell them to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Leave it inside until it is resolved. When it is healed, care for them with enemas or another treatment until they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistula.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	The majority of the appearances of fistula occur due to dryness of the wound or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Since they are ancient and not worth the medicine in that case, you must lance them with the spatula or your nail until they become moist and stop their escape from above, which prevents consolidation; and approach their care until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You must remove them with a very sharp blade as soon as possible, and let the first one become dry and scab over; and approach their care until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of almesamir is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that almesamir is key and not to notice redness on the body similar to a clavicle, it appears in all parts of the body, especially around the thighs and groin area, and if you experience pain because of it, it should be treated immediately.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Therefore, it should be incised what is around the clavicle and held with forceps or oil, and be removed from its root; and approach its care.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize those that were mentioned in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	However, verruca is a small, rough, round protrusion on the surface of the body, and it usually appears in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Its treatment is to stretch and incise it or press it with a plier or cloth until it goes back inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	They are already removed both internal and external ones using the tool I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	However, formica is a small, furrowed or large, rough protrusion on the surface of the body, when you press it, it becomes inflamed like a flea bite, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Its treatment is to take a pen-like or pen-shaped cannula, strong, and place it over the formica until it is surrounded by the circle of the cannula from both sides; then rotate your hand with the cannula around the circumference of the formica, and press it in the skin, and remove the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, do this with an iron or copper cannula in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The area above the cannula should be brought to subtlety, closed and wrapped so that the knowledge of it is obscured and the rotation of it is avoided.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the formica as described in the cauterization of athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the tools that are administered for cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cauterization is performed with silver or lead or copper melted or hammered; and sometimes it is performed with small and large tools depending on those that are administered, for the one administered in the care of small children should be small; and for those whose anus is friable or painful, the cauterizations of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small cauterization:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide in the following way; and it should be distinguished where the bag is tied in this way as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (uncovered) not to leak, narrowing it towards subtlety; and in one of the sides there are two cuts, and in the other side a cut, and the width of the cut should be according to the thickness of the rays, and the wider one should be smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	The bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed, and its purpose is a palm size.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	It should be pierced with many holes as it is rolled up, and if the space between the holes is not wide enough to accommodate the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert a strong needle into those holes and draw it out, or pass the needle through them; adjust the bag around it. When the bag is placed inside, it should be tight at the top of the cannula between two distinct points with firm pressure, and then cannulate each hole: However, the quality of cannulation is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; be careful that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should be laid on his back, and raise his knees on top of him and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then anoint the outside of the cautery with oil, ointment of hog's lard or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then gently insert it into the rectum, and the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it forcefully and repeatedly until all that is in the cannula is expelled into the intestine; then remove the cannula and the patient raises his knees to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine is insufficient for this purpose, make more of it; and if it remains in there for an entire night, it is less effective.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cannulate the intestine in cases of abdominal pain and its cause is unknown, then continue to cannulate until it heals.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there is diarrhea or abscess in the rectum, then use a thin and sharp cannula, as the children's cannulas are called.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free, and I say the treatment of that with more detail and with medicines according to the requirement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are diverse depending on what causes the sores and according to the place where the sores occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes that often cause sores are such as cuts from stones, incisions of space or sword, strikes with a lance, fist, javelin, or similar weapons.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the sores that are in the places of the body are such as a sore on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar places on other parts of the body.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple sores of the head, since the composite sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider if it was caused by a stone or similar object and the wound has been sewn only and is large and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then you should make an incision and drain the skull immediately, and do not delay; and remove the pus according to the strength of the blood if there is no other reason prohibiting draining, especially if the blood coming out of the sore is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And make the incision on the opposite side of the affected area; and care for the patient to avoid infection, vomiting, and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	However, if there is any reason for minimal food intake, then reduce the food and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Stop over the sore if an abscess occurs, soak it in rose oil or vinegar that is strengthened.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of an abscess (apostema), then pause over the wound. If it is recent and still has its own pus and air has not yet changed the powder I recommend, apply small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed (the pus), then pause over some soothing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or an incision of space and does not fit properly, and the lips are not closed well, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend for their suturing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh and is not blocked but only held by a small suspending device, then incise it and heal the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its place with caudle, and command the patient to avoid foods that cause gout: capons and similar meats, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if gangrene occurs in the flesh and does not stick to the bone, then you should incise everything that is putrid and remove it, and heal the wound.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds it is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and has not been cut by medicines, then you should search for the artery. And if you find one that has not been incised, you should incise it with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not help, then you should cauterize until the blood is released.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this case, you should sprinkle that powder on them because it will solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: Recipe oil from sesame seeds, dragon's blood sap, and burnt charcoal; mix all three together and sieve it, then fill the wound with the mixture, tightly bind it with a good bandage until it adheres, and let it coagulate with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And press it down with pulvis and let it rest until it is healed, but do not remove the bandage as long as it is not an abscess because the medicine has not yet reached it.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you can only use cauterization when sesame oil and dragon's blood sap are not available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now you should perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and only on fresh wounds with their own pus, as the air has not yet altered them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has already altered them, especially in summer, then you should not place this powder in that position, but rather heal them with what I have said before, as you pause over them with various soothing ointments or powder made from barley flour and water until they become pustules; and heal them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it is a bone fracture in the wound that is small, you should extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will tell the cure for skull fractures where poison has occurred.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment and it is similar to simple wounds on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve in the neck is incised or an artery, you should not perform surgery on it unless it is a nerve, in which case you must avoid treatment with strong cauterizing agents like sulfur and similar substances because they harm nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of irritation on the wound because the substance of nerves is tender and its continuity is with the brain, which is the base of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicines like warm water baths, occasionally infused in rose oil or not, and when washed with sweet water and other remedies as described above, and moist soothing ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, you should administer suture or close the lips of it, and heal it with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part of the pus-filled cavity, you should perforate it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound has already incised an artery and blood flow is obtained, you should separate it or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the spinal column have been dislocated or completely separated, and the veins of the neck are safe, you should adjust the lips of the spine using sutures along the spine of the spinal column without touching it; equalize it with a straightening instrument and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding and keep it still for several days; and heal it with soothing ointments that provide stipticitat and stimulation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all those you can; leave what is not accessible inside to allow the wound to heal, separate it, and ease the bleeding from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle that recommended powder over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has formed a fistula (abnormal opening or passage), then cure it with what will come to mind from its description in its respective chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From wounds of the neck or similar ones that occur between the shoulder blades and are made with a sword, dagger, spear, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the wound is from a lance or sword, and sometimes of great depth, then consider whether the patient has wind from the wound when he complains of it; know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the wound is not deep and recent with bleeding, then pause in it with powder of the first hour, but avoid pressing too much so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and weakens the patient, but rather pause with an attractive powder, and remove it two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not covered with an ointment, then pause in the orifice of the wound with an old cottonswab to drain any fluids; make the patient sleep on the wound so that any blood clots properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days have passed from the wound and no spasm or tremor of the heart, nor bad breath, nor any other unfavorable signs occur, then know that the wound is healed; and therefore treat it with heat and other healing remedies until it is completely cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing is excused and it remains open all the time, then know that a fistula has been made; cure it according to its description.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut and simple in the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with suture if large or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already penetrated into the bone and the sharp objects are still embedded, then twist the wound to extract those sharp objects, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, leave them in to allow the wound to heal, as extracting them is eased.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds occurring on other parts of the body, the remedy in treatment is similar to that mentioned earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From a large abdominal wound sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine protrudes, requiring immediate and careful insertion and suture of them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and you should know that its reduction is even more difficult, if not promptly inserted into their place, for it will swell and thicken, making insertion of them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best condition is medium, for in that case, reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Know that stitching the abdomen is done according to four methods, but two of them are common and necessary in stitches for other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	The remaining two stitching methods are specific to other wounds, but especially applicable in the stitching of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and a cause of the intestine has occurred due to it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this is in one of two methods: either because of the small disruption as mentioned earlier, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat the affected area so that you immerse a wet sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or you take them in hot water, cyperus, spike, and wrap them around the intestine to resolve the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you will find one in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use heat along with water in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and malva are boiled, as this eases the insertion of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if insertion of the intestine is excused from this treatment, then you should make an incision with a small instrument and extract mucus.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the initial treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there is not incision, and it is not necessary to incise for lack of resources.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the tool is curved and sharp, the other part not curved but blunt, with a thin tip, but not as sharp as a spatula, it should be slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And since the wound is spreading and the intestine is protruding, it is necessary to reduce it in its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that spot, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the wound is wide and located in a lower part of the abdomen, the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs as much as their head; if it is located above the abdomen, then the patient's head and chest should be lowered as much as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the wound is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, always pay attention and consider this so that the side where the wound is located is raised more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	It is necessary to provide this for large wounds and moderate wounds as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	For small wounds, apply what is ready-at-hand and make sure that the person providing care is among your most skilled assistants; they should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the edges, and open the incision from one end to another where suturing may be needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing method: take a needle (or count needles according to the size of the wound); and press it from the edge of the wound on the little finger, tighten the needle once, ensuring you do not pierce both edges of the skin, with both ends of the thread outside the incision, until you make it penetrate through that part; then you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread with double stitches around the needle, and occasionally on both sides together, and sew the edges and wound with appropriate closure; then insert the index finger into the wound and introduce another needle there, and insert it as you did with the first needle; do not stop suturing until all the contraction of the wound has been completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Sewing needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, for thin needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin, so they must be moderate in thickness and sharpness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is necessary that the needle should not be inserted into the same edges of the skin too much, so that the flesh is not lightly penetrated and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Do not prolong the suture so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Press the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient during their sleep; place a powder made from crushed charcoal on the suture around the entire wound, which will hold the tips of the needles in place; leave it until you know that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles for the suturing process.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second method of suturing is common: place four parts (the edges and two ends of the skin) in one stitch with a needle that is covered in thread of moderate thickness and sharpness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then, when the needle penetrates these four parts, retract it from that side of the wound where you started, so that the thread pulls up the purulent material from the deeper part of the wound, so that the suture is tight like a sewn cloth with which fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Stop between each stitch at the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This type of suturing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	I sewed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who had been pierced by a sword, and the wound was larger than one palm; it was surrounded by hernias around two palms from the hernia of the same side and was located in the middle of the limb; and so I reduced it after the hernia had stayed outside the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured him, and he recovered; and so he lived for many years, and was converted to my way of life.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; but by miracle, for I did not cure him with lard, as there was no lard nor any medicine in that place, but I pressed a hot iron on the wound twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	However, I will tell you two types of suturing according to the Gospel narrative.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And begin by suturing the skin, and insert the needle from the outside edge to the inside edge.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And since the needle penetrates the skin and goes through it according to the correct method and the length of the entire body, leave the tip of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; then make the other end of the needle penetrate from the inside edge of the wound to the outside edge on the other side of the thumb.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And since you have made the incision, make the incision again in that same location at the edge of the muscle from outside to inside; remove the exterior layer and make the needle penetrate the other side of the incision from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Make the incision pass through the exterior layer (of the muscle) that is at that location, and make the needle pierce the opposite side of the incision from inside to outside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin to sew that edge (of the incision) with the one from the opposite side, and withdraw the needle that pierces it, and return it to its place in the same suture, and sew the exterior layer of the muscle on that side with that thread.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this step and the next one until you sew everything that is outside as shown in that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The total of this suturing method is that you sew with the skin suture, which is used for sewing the fur, in such a way that you sew the muscle one side at a time starting from the edge of the incision, and then turn to the other side until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suturing method specifically called "Gualia" and this one is about the thigh and is recommended for that purpose, is that you sew it as follows: first, gather all the parts to the corresponding side according to nature; then apply the opposite edges to each other, and this is done in accordance with what I have advised.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You must insert the needle at your side of the incision on the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside at that point, and take two edges of the muscle; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two places on the muscle.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside at two places on the muscle in directions opposite to that.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is the one that precedes memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the thigh suture (Gualia)
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others say that the abdomen suture is corrected with two needles, so you insert each one with a cord in this way, starting from the entrance of one needle and making it penetrate to the other side as the ones who sew the hearts do.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than those in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The remedy for one wound is a judgment for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This is because when you obtain the wound before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it correctly, then pause over the emollient powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that ointment that is present among you before it hardens and the threads penetrate, and allow the muscle and skin to consolidate; and care for it in this way as with the treatment of other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicines, pause over it immediately, since it begins to get infected, soften, and change color twice a day, in this way as you have learned, until it heals, because you do not need another medicine for simple wounds in most cases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound communicates to the main limbs, it is necessary that you immerse woolen yarn in infused oil or raw oil, and apply it in the area between the joints and leave it for a while.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your hernias, since it often spreads, then cauterize that one with black sterilized vinegar, especially when pus has formed in the hernia and an exit is made penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that one with a large hernia heals more slowly than those in thin hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gegunu" does not receive wound healing from any location; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and its large size, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is skin, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment, as you reduce hernias similarly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed and turned black or green, then you should tighten it with a thread on the spot that is discolored, to bring out blood flow, since in skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert a new suture where the old one was, and leave two ends of the thread hanging on the side opposite to the wound, so that you relieve the attraction of it, since you must pull the skin and release the flow from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recall of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a small disruption occurs in the intestine and it is possible to restore [it], in some cases, there was a man who had been plagued in his abdomen by being pierced with a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and because of this treatment and pus accumulation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I continue with the treatment because it was not assured in healing, but rather to cauterize that within which fire heals and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I see that the place is already consolidated, so I approach the patient regarding the misfortune that has occurred in his abdomen; and no one should come for this misfortune and disturb his diet and drinking, and he must rest in bed and exercise at his leisure.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to tie it in this way: and you take large bread crumbs; and adjust the two edges of the wound and place one from these, which has an open mouth, over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when you press on them and tighten its mouth, remove the head of it, because it adheres and is not resolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another bread crumb near the first, and do not stop making breadcrumbs according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And return that [the bread crumb] and suture the wound, and let those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine may be sutured with a fine thread made from an animal's intestine, as it is sharper; and you take the end of these intestinal threads, make them clean, tie the end to the thread, wrap it, pass the thread through needles, sew the intestine with it, and reduce the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with breadcrumbs is not only by trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not mending but rather cauterizing, and it is not healing of it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and pustule when it becomes old and chronic, becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and releases pus continuously without being drained, in any member, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is hardened knot, lasting, white, without pain and with concavity as the concavity of an abscess; and therefore it is called an enlarged abscess, that is, a pimple.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is moist, which releases pus; and in a short time the moisture is drained in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture becomes thick, rarefied, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already said in the division that, as I have told you about the wounds, every ulcer that is not healed or not in raw flesh is not one of these but due to one of these causes: either from scarcity of blood in the body; or from malice towards it; or because between it and the lips there is hardened flesh preventing the growth of flesh; or because it is a thick legion; or because that ulcer in itself contains pus and the matter sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is plague; or due to the property of the region such as Saragossa, where digestion is difficult and the healing of pustules is slow by nature; or because there is only one bone, or few bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which are performed by surgical means with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all members of the body, because some are those that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sphincters, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed by joint composition such as the hand and foot; and these are those that bring to the proximity of the main member and similar places.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, these fistulas of this type are among the difficult-to-heal diseases and do not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if one of these fistulas has such a depth that it does not reach those places mentioned above and you hope for healing and believe in its treatment and want to understand it, then take the attempt to remove or iron it, and if the fistula follows a straight line, and you search for it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine probe, because lead has the lightness of its body curved according to the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible discharge, it is not possible for you to attempt healing on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the fissures with a mixture of wine and oil, because the moisture that you use to clean one will affect the others and cause them to run.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Approach it very carefully, because you must know if here you have a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short, or it is a fistula with horrible discharge that covers everything with its entire strength, with the patient's distress, and the discovery of the pain should be your compression on the area, and similar to the meaning and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes with certainty, then you should proceed to treatment: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is shallow near a joint, far from a joint, near a nerve, an artery, a vein, or one of those places which are known to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry up the fistula according to what has been said about its origin, and remove anything that is in that drainage and rotten flesh, and anything that has been born in the sores of the skin or tissue, and heal it within where it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is deep and long, according to rectitude, it is necessary for you to incise it as far as possible, and then clean it of all its corrupt flesh; and apply hot poultices covered in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have prepared with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that with some frequent observations until the hot medicine burns everything rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with fresh dressing that generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what you have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and you must certify it, then you should investigate it and dry it up according to what you have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as mentioned earlier.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and has any corruption and blackness, you should cut it until the corruption is entirely stopped; and then heal it with anything that generates flesh until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	But if it is not healed and continues to ooze pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore you must explore further and examine and clean the area carefully with the last available strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in that case, there is no point in continuing treatment.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should remove it using fine forceps that are appropriate for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there is pus in the bones, you should carefully extract all of them, without any cause that weakens your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and the incision does not fear or make an error, then you should cut the leaking membranes or flesh if it is present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, you should pause over the wound until the wound heals, and leave it filled with flesh and membranes around those bones, and keep the wound from consolidating, and restrict the incision that you have made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a strong solution of oil, or the wound submerged in Egyptian balm, or one of the green poultices, because when the membranes are softened, the bones are separated from their adhesion, and the attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as the bone of thigh or hip, or resembles those, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then scrape that with resin only behind until the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, it is necessary to cut that part entirely and remove the corrupt area, and then heal it until it is solidified.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I recommend to you that you bind the patient's thigh with a bandage and support for the operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around 30 years old experienced pain in his thigh, and from within the parts inside the body, matter had reached the thigh, and that matter was pus-like and greatly so, and it was not caused by something external.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time passed due to the error of doctors until the abscess had burst, and the matter was discharged, and its healing was stopped until the abscess became a fistula, and feces were present in the openings which all contained pus and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so the patient was treated by many doctors for two years, but they were not wise, but skilled, until I was summoned.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the fistula and the matter that flowed from those openings due to a large wound, and the man's body was already completely healed, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted a probe into one of the openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined and probed all the openings, and found that they all led to the same area of the fistula.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I took a knife and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a bone fragment, which was decayed and rotten and discolored; it had already been corrupted for some time, and a part of the fistula had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And so I cut away what was exposed and prepared from the bone that had been exposed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought it was not in the bone but the corruption that had burst and been cut away, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied medication to heal the wound for a long time, but it was not healed.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And so I examined again and found more decay on the bone after the initial examination, and continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I cut away what appeared of that corruption, and then I was determined to heal it and restore it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I continued to examine and cut away the bone little by little in detail, and finally performed its restoration, but it was not restored until I cut through about an inch of it, and the marrow came out with it, and then I restored it with medication, and it healed slightly and improved.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	There was no need for further examination or cutting of the bone in the operation except for the looseness of the flesh around it and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in the patient, since he suffered from excessive syncope and bad fainting spells constantly due to an overabundance of evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, it heals through complete healing, and there is no need for a replacement of the hard bone in its place; the position of the bone should be corrected within his body and its virtue restored; and it should be maintained in its proper position and not subjected to any counteraction or harm in walking or any other cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is a broken bone in the body, it must be treated as follows: you should grab it firmly at its end and command someone to hold it extended; then you bind it with linen that is thicker than the first linen bandage; and apply it above the skin that is left behind, and stretch the end of it so that the skin is pulled away, and you will expose the skin over the area where you want to cut, and you should cut only the skin without cutting into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	You should place a splint or table under the bone properly, as you are not prohibited from cutting through the rotten flesh with the saw when you do that.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The cutting should be done little by little over the rotten area, as if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and not visible to touch, and perhaps the cut may need to be made again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, one continuous division occurs with the other, and the corruption may be at the same level or in a different part of it, then you should expose all the skin; and place a splint under it, and cut that first division where the corruption continues to the next cutting.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	The cutting should be done according to the location of the corruption, as stated before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, cut that joint where it is corrupt, and saw the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, it is not logical but a trick.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you should investigate the corruption in whatever way appears to you, and cut it open, clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and correct every instrument correctly, when it does not work against your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know what the saws and blades are for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Know that this operation means something to you regarding the type of instrument required; when you are skilled and long-lived in the methods of this art, and experienced with the methods of diseases, since then you will have already known what is appropriate for the instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones, with which you will proceed according to your discretion, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Large surgical instrument form:
Forma de ray:	Form of a large knife:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this knife should be in the shape of a star-headed nail and its points shaped like the spikes on an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not fitting unless the heads of the joints are crushed when they are corrupt, or the opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger scissors than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of rat-toothed scissors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The other saw should be made appropriately shaped with a convex arch and the sharpness of its blade and the teeth of its blade should be well-made.
Forma de lu:	Form of a bandage:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of concave-shaped scissors:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of thin scissors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of curved-tipped scissors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small scissors resembling tweezers:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of saw-like instruments that are used for cutting bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of small saw-like instruments that are used for cutting bones:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another saw-like instrument; this one resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in various places along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a ray that is suitable for scraping the perforated bone:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangle-shaped and very sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and it is like all the causes that we have mentioned of scrapers, saws, and saw-like instruments.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision of bones and for their joints.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The incisions can be caused by an intrinsic or extrinsic reason, or as a result of not treating the corruption with appropriate medicine, or when the corruption continues to spread and the member is not affected by any other cause. In such cases, it is necessary to make an incision in the member as far as the corruption reaches, so that the patient escapes from the pain or the more serious damage to the member through death or illness.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which occurs is that the member becomes black before it is cauterized, or if pus is present, it should be brought near to the blackness until it spreads into the member and affects the entire body; and thus you must make an incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous substances such as scorpion venom, viper or rattlesnake and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or poison is at the end of the finger, then you should make an incision on the finger and not give space to the corruption for it to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you access the palm of the hand, then you should make an incision at the base of the thumb, and not give space to the corruption until it reaches the base of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if the arm becomes infected, then you should make an incision along the arm to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads beyond the joint and sometimes reaches the elbow, then in such cases it is the death of the patient; and administering another treatment at this point is of little use or value.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption spreads to the foot and the toe becomes infected, you should make an incision into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if there is swelling on the sole of the foot, then you should make an incision on the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	However, if pus fills the heel, then you should make an incision along the calf to the heel joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has occurred on the anus, it is not a cure but rather dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting off or severing the limb is that you stretch the ligament on the side away from where you want to cut, and then stretch another ligament at the location; the minister extends one ligament on the sides away, and the ministera extends another ligament above; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments far enough for a spatula to be inserted until all the flesh is exposed; then it is to be cut off or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It should be placed cloth on all sides of the wound so that it does not touch the affected area and come to the patient with the injury wrapped in a sterile dressing and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs when you are working, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place some stopping powder on it; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected limb with cloth as appropriate, and cure it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend that you apply this remedy to a man in his foot, which I also recommend, which is a black spot on the foot due to burn-like scalding caused by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs in the same location where the entire foot is affected.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man should prepare himself by putting more of the cure on the affected limb with the intensity of pain and scalding of it, and cut off that foot at the joint, and heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long periods of time will occur due to this treatment in the location indicated by the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Then it comes to me and I perform the removal of that superfluity with what you place on the hand of the medicines, and cleanse the body of it; and the superfluity is not returned but begins in the other location instead.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to amputate the hand of him and I did not want to do that because I feared the return of that superfluity, and moreover, fearing death, I decided to amputate the hand of him because the nature of his illness was dangerous.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he lost consciousness, it returned to his land and I received word that the man had prepared and amputated his entire hand and healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not added this narrative except to serve as a guide for dealing with this illness and to indicate the meaning and manner in which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	For cure of the bladder and quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged until there is collection of pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is expelled from it, and the hole remains as if it were a vessel, and the covering that is above it like thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption spreads to any limb, then it is called a fistula and not otherwise.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure is that the covering is cut open all around as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thinned and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the covering sticks and that further corruption has not occurred, and the covering is thin, then you cure it with clysterium.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	You consider the sinus and if it is large and the odor is fetid, you cure it with clysterium made of Egyptian medicine which is of oil, vinegar, and spices ground into portions, placed in a vessel, and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes soft and boils to a specific temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and you cure the sinus with that solution, and strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that with care and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the smell has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes from vinegar, and put it in water; and then strain it and cleanse the sinus with that until you are sure that the sinus has healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with ground spices, and cleanse it with vinegar and honey mixed, for the nature of honey is that it cleanses and purifies, and vinegar makes the sinus stick together, especially when there is an excess of hardness and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are sure that the sinus has healed, then cleanse it with what makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take thickening agents such as diaphanicon and dissolve it in the given oil or vinegar and stiptic; or cleanse the intestine with certain medicines and other laxatives that I have written about in the treatise on laxatives.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow where the clisterium tube cannot be inserted, then you must gradually widen it with a small iron, and pause whenever it is filled with Egyptian oil or basilicon laxative until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the opening is wide, you should stretch the lips of it and sew them up with that amount that the clisterium can pass through without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	When the opening of the sinus where the arm passes is elevated to the armpit, you should dry it in the area where the pus collects so that the arm can run inside below, because when the arm is contracted in the sinus, flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone as desired, then make an incision in the member preparing it with the appropriate preparation so that the arm can easily pass through, and ensure that there is no obstacle to the passage of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus according to what you wish to extend them over a cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of such size that it communicates with the entire sinus; and then make an incision with the forfexes in the correct direction of the opening of the sinus, making a wide groove along the opening of the sinus; and then extend another cloth of laxatives on it according to the width of the groove, and place it over that position far from the opening of the sinus to alleviate the pain in the arm, but do not leave the cloth large, instead place some other laxative cloth every day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But the one that is on the opening of the sinus, which you should rinse at all times to remove what is attached to the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what comes from the arm is too much or little, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And you should also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is abscessed.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that has been deposited on the opening of the sinus adhering or becoming attached, you should remove or separate it after three days, and when you separate the wound, you change the cloth for another one and renew the laxative.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a long distance between it and space, you should not despair of its adherence, because healing is approaching, because some people have a slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and the opposite happens in others.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is not digested in the arm for several days, you should know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you must adjust it with drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they will dry like laxatives such as diaphanicon when they are added excessively.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing that is cured is to take diaphanicon laxatives and dissolve them in olive oil, and add an old anti-inflammatory substance to it, and place it there and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And you do the same action in that case when there is no arm, using diaphanicon laxatives and honey which becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and crush them together, and sprinkle everything and grind it over the honey while it is near the fire, and line the result with a cloth and press it onto the sinus; and line the honey that you have thickened with it until it becomes thick, and grind it on a cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered long-term Aristolochia and its root and celestial (and this celestial) and rye flour and centaury, and use of these simple drugs or adjust them, grind those and sift and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; hold onto it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus persists and is not cured by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the proximate part of it (the affected area), and it begins to affect the bones or other hard parts or joints; then you should cure it with fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment for paronychia (an infection of the skin around the nail) and scraping the nails, adding an incision to the finger and section (removal of a part).
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that begins at the nail of the finger or toe and spreads to other parts, and if it persists for a long time and its treatment is expensive, it becomes an abscessed abscess or corrupted, and pus enters the nailbed which corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and its corruption moves into the bone that gives off a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes gangrenous and its color changes to black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have the patient with what has been said in the division and it does not respond to your treatment, then you must incise with iron the excess that remains of the nail and approximate cauterize the wound close to it, because cauterization is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the addictions of the nail press the flesh in the joints inside, it begins to hurt and then ulcerate, then you must stop pressing the subcutaneous vein at the angle where the nail is piercing the flesh, and apply pressure on it to push it up and incise the affected flesh with ease, and place medicines corrosive ointments on top of it until it is completely removed; then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for there is no healing of a corrupted bone in any amount of time.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread in the affected area, you must incise it in one of the nodes according to the remembered location, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	However, if the nail is struck with percussion or traction and causes intense pain, then at the beginning you should anesthetize the patient, and remove the nail by scraping it horizontally across the tip in a straight line, taking care that the incision does not penetrate the flesh below the nail, for this will cause excessive growth of new tissue in the affected area; and cure the affected area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the affected part, which is found in many men, is all flesh, or it is in the bone, or it is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born from the joints, or their origin is in certain nodes of the affected areas.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, one born from the nodes of the finger is not ill, but one that originates from the joints is very sick.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those born as flesh, the incision should be light, and you should make the incision according to its location with a long blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	However, treatment of one that originates from the joint is difficult; therefore, be careful to avoid an abscess forming there.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, in one born from the nodes of the affected area, you must incise at first the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone; then use an appropriate saw and cure it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	However, consolidation that occurs in the affected area between its motes (small bony outgrowths) for various reasons or due to the nature of the man who has it, or due to consolidation of a wound or burn, or similar, therefore you must remove the consolidation until the affected area returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their swellings of the infiltrated areas with warm oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is consolidation in certain parts of the palm, then you must remove the consolidation as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varicosed, large veins filled with mucus-like substances that appear in the joints of the body, and the most common occurrence is in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you must administer purgatives of black bile for several days with strong emesis, and draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it is incised and the black blood is extracted, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is removed.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of him (or her) is made according to this method: first, wrap the leg with warm water until the thick blood has been resolved, which is a foul substance from the leg, and then tightly compress the patient's leg above the knee with a bandage, near the division just below the thigh, and apply dry heat to a vein, or to two, or three veins with a wide incision, and raise black blood with your thumb from the division just below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired amount and frequency has been drained, and that which will remove the affliction of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then tie it up and instruct him to avoid foods causing black bile production.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation (of the hernia) is done according to this method: if there are inflammations in it, immerse the patient's leg in warm water and wrap it with warm water until it swells and the veins become congested; or if exercise is practiced, if bathing is not at your disposal, keep the member warm until it is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then cut the cord in the direction of the vein along its length or towards the rear (of the hernia), or at the lower end you should do it on the penis or the scrotum.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open the cord with scissors and expose the vein from all sides until you feel it, and be aware that when you see blackness spreading, this is a sign of death approaching.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And since you've found the white one (the healthy cord), cut the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place the iron rod under it until it is raised and expelled from the cord, and suspend it with a hook of gold or silver.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision alongside the first one for three fingers, and expose the cord above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift it up and incise the lower incision towards the scrotum, extracting it and lifting it out through the second incision, then extract it from the incision above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Do this until the entire cord is extracted from the upper incision or any of the incisions, until it is completely drained; then close the incision.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If it is not easy for you to extract and lift it, insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, or introduce the iron rod behind it and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Keep in mind that it should not be incised; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to elevate the hernia and bring harm to the patient through this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire cord is completely expelled, place it on a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil (or plain oil), and treat that area until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the wound is contracted due to a twisting in which it is enclosed at the division, and this is not straight as we have said, then you must cut through all sides of the twist and the points of enclosure of it, and suspend it with scissors until it is lifted completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Keep in mind to not incise the vein during your incision and not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate the hernia; serve your caution in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision for the cut wound:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be made as with the hook nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of a large flexibility, for if it were thin, it would incise the vein through its thinness; having too much thickness in this way, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands such as Egypt in Arabic lands and in Indian lands with dry and scant vegetation, where there is no herb or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	Strongly pulsating veins are generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The process is due to putrefaction that comes from the cord, such as the venom of snakes and worms, scorpions, and worms breeding between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the onset of the event is from this vein that appears in the inflammation of the thigh; and apply heat to the location; and start the vein flowing from the site of this swelling, which seems reasonable from its base (plant).
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you cover over it a lead weight of which its weight should be equal to two drachms. Immerse it in it and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And keep watch for some time until any symptoms appear outside, cover it with lead and nail it down.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it continues without improvement, then you should make an incision in it and cover the remaining part; do not incise that one until it has come out, because if you incise it, it becomes contracted, enters into the flesh, causes an abscess, pustule at the site and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Since it must be treated gently and slowly extracted until it comes out completely without leaving any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has issued in some men of about the length of five palms and ten fingers, and I have already heard that one of twenty palms has been extracted.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of treatment, insert a probe into the wound and penetrate deeply with a long probe through the body until all matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; then take care of it as in the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes heals slowly, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes many painful discharges; and it has been seen to come out from each discharge as a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat it as we have said in the previous section and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section about worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine sickness in some places because it often affects cattle and has few worms that are born between the skin and the flesh, which move up and down, and are revealed by the sensation of the limbs until the skin bursts and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, leeches, and tapeworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice because when it moves in the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, at which point it causes strong vomiting, enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to treat and extract it, do not proceed unless you have observed its movement and appearance in the patient's body, and then it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and below it with great effort and constriction, and apply heat to it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is attached to the flesh and not swollen, you should pause with a heated cautery at the site until it dies; the greatest fear is corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see it approaching the head near the brain, strengthen around the forehead with strong compression, apply heat to it and extract it; it is necessary for the patient to use purification of his body with medicines evacuating corrupt humors, and be careful of foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section about jaundice (yellow fever).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called jaundice in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some limbs, and it is swollen from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have seen that as I advised you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the brachial vein of the arm, and after it had been opened for an hour, I saw the inflammation swell up like a worm moving towards the place, but more slowly than usual, as if it were living silver running from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it disappeared from the pain in that area and settled in the muscle, and I pressed it for an hour at this point.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Approach correct in the other body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Approach correct in my turn so that I may rotate the entire body according to what I see, and it was very marvelous to me of the transformation of him and of the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had already seen before him in the highest heels according to that method, but I have seen others who say that pain is being transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it as with the heels thus in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was because the woman was old, in whose body and veins were exposed, and in this case it appeared to me as wind being transformed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies with veins made soft.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain, do not appear in the heels as we have said, but rather be strong on it and gently and dry over it until the constriction of wind is exited, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the feet, then you cure it with expulsion of the body and what drives out wind, and sing to it with pills made from rue and pills of serapion and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of removal of thorns.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thorns are varied according to their species, and according to the places in the body where they occur, because their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, which are solid; and from those with three angles, and of those to which tongues belong; and from those to which splinters belong.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is according to the members and the places in which it occurs is according to two methods: because the members or the main parts, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, hernia, bladder, and similar ones; and therefore when you catch it in any of these main parts and signs of death appear to you, I recommend that you approach, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that thorn from those in whom death has seized him where it is located more dangerously, and when you do not see the bad signs and the thorn is not hidden deep in the part, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the servant are when you catch a thorn that passes through the bone and exits from the cavity located above the brain, because it often causes violent vomiting, dizziness, heat in the feet, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, a weak word is separated and destroyed, and saliva is released from the mouth, white fluid comes out of the wound location similar to powder, and it looks like moisture of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then do not cure or extract the thorn, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the thorn when caught in the heart, which is near the left breast, and feels hard-knitted, not empty; and strong movement of the thorn is like that of the pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and feverish sweat, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends on him completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the thorn has pierced the lung are mainly sputum from the wound and swelling of vessels near the neck, and the color of the patient changes, and breathes out a large spirit, and asks for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the thorn catches the scrotum that is on the feet, and pain occurs near the small ribs, it is usually accompanied by great pain and heavy breathing, but not all members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the thorn catches the stomach, then it is usually accompanied by some indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the thorn catches the abdomen and is embedded in it, then there may be a wound or tear of the tissue or hernia that has been disrupted, and there is no hope in extracting the thorn from it.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the thorn catches the bladder and exits through urine, and it causes some injury outside of it, then there is great pain on the patient, and you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and joints of the spine, cervical vertebra, pelvis, hip, and similar members are saved according to the greater dispositions when the thorn does not puncture a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen about these thorns, because it means for your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason is that in a man a thorn entered the lacrimal duct of his foot in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from the other side, putting gray earwax on it, and he was cured, and there was no damage to his foot.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract another arrow from a Jew's thigh where it entered him in the groin area of his scrotum, pull back the eyelid, and the arrow is hidden and not immediately visible, but only a small tip remains adhered to his flesh, and it was a large sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with a lion head without feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	Send for another arrow from the Jew's thigh, but do not harm him accidentally.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extract another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the armpit, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers; locate the entry point of the arrow and make an incision over it, then submerge the arrowhead in the wound and carefully remove it. The Christian is healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extract another arrow that was shot into a man's stomach. I feared he would die from it, but after thirty days had passed and his condition did not change due to any cause related to his illness, I made an incision over the arrow and carefully removed it. The patient recovered without any harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound became infected. After seven years, I cauterized the arrowhead at its base.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman who was shot in the stomach, and the wound became infected inside her. After many days had passed, her condition did not improve, and she did not experience any problems in her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man who was shot in the face, and the wound became infected, but when I cauterized the arrowhead, there was no excessive pain, only similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extract the arrow from the man of the king who was shot in the middle of his nose and had started to decline slightly on the right side, but the arrowhead was completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was summoned to treat him within three days of his injury from the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found the wound of the arrow to be narrow; I gently probed it with a fine instrument and did not feel anything; but I felt a prick on the right side, so I hoped that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I expanded the area around the wound with an absorbent and healing substance, believing that the spot would become inflamed to reveal the location of the arrow, so that it could be cut off.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	I did not harm the area with any accidental injury, believing that the arrow had reached this spot; I continued applying the absorbent substance to it for many days and did not cause any further problems; however, the wound became infected during this time, and the patient recovered from his illness after several days during which he felt the arrow in his nose and informed me of its location.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I covered the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and with the probe I found the tip of the arrow, which was adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	I placed the corrosive medicine on the wound to open it up until I saw clearly the tip of the arrow, and then I waited for several months for the wound to heal.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	After the wound was opened up, I was able to enter it with forceps and remove the arrow without causing any problems, as will be described in more detail at the end of this passage. I carefully removed the arrow with various tools until one day I managed to grasp it with descending forceps, according to their shape, and finally extracted it. I then restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some physicians believed that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient suffered no harm in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, according to which you will understand and deduce what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the difficulties encountered in it are not understandable through narrative or easily read in books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The skilled craftsman learns more from a little than the multitude, and what is present teaches us about what is absent. Novel operations and new instruments are necessary to overcome unusual difficulties in the art when they arise.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been shot except by two means: either by attraction to the place they entered; or by the opposite force of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The arrow that was shot into the place where it entered, or the arrow coming from fleshly parts and shot outwards and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If it does not occur immediately after the shot, then you must leave it for some days until the surrounding flesh softens and the attraction is reduced and its exit becomes possible.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it has been shot into bone and does not occur immediately, then you must wait for some days and move it with attraction and movement every day, and eventually it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it does not occur immediately after some days, then you must perforate around the arrow in all directions with a very thin instrument until the wound is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the splinter is embedded in the skull bone and has proceeded into one of the brain ventricles, appearing as the symptoms I mentioned earlier, then refrain from removing the splinter and leave it within until its location becomes equal to the surrounding tissue after several days; for if the splinter perforates the brain, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the splinter is embedded only in the bone of the skull and does not enter the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any symptoms related to those mentioned earlier, then you should try to draw out the splinter and the pus.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply embedded and you are unable to extract it, then administer travel medicines around the splinter as recommended, and take care of the surrounding area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the splinter is hidden deep within the body and cannot be felt, then you should probe it carefully, and if you can feel it, you should draw it out with appropriate tools.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot access it due to the swelling and length of the wound, and if it is not bone, nerve or vein there, then you should make an incision over the wound to widen it so that the splinter can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If it is covered by scabs that need to be removed, then you should remove the tissue surrounding it in all directions using any tool that may be useful; and if you cannot access it due to the obstruction of the scabs and twisting of those areas, then you should try to break the scabs and twist them until you can gain access.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the splinter from any location, you should use twisting and forceps on all sides to make it yield; and with delicate precision, avoid breaking the splinter and make the removal as easy as possible for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot perform the procedure at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding tissues have softened and become easier to manipulate, and then reattempt the procedure when it is more manageable.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If blood flow is hindered, you should administer what has been mentioned in the cure section.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer appropriate tools for the removal of the splinter; do it with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I have recommended and as you are able.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you should counteract the splinter so that the patient is relieved as much as possible in the manner described for treating the splinter in this case, as it will be more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not feasible for you, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, if the splinters are protruding from opposite sides, or have already damaged adjacent parts on the outside, or cause swelling in the area above the cervix and sometimes painfully prominent; then you should cut the affected area; and make the incision according to the size that the forceps can grasp; and draw it out, as it will be easily removed.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, you should twist the ramrod against the splinter until it penetrates the bone, widen the area around it, and carefully extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if it does not come out within several days, you should reattempt the procedure.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the splinter's shaft is in the wound, you should push it out.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is hidden and you wish to apply pressure, you should insert the probe into it, if it is hard, use a concave instrument to fit into the concavity of the splinter and push it out with the probe.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the splinter is concave, you should push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the splinter will be relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the splinter is embedded, you should curve all of the surrounding tissue around it, if possible, and take care of that area with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the splinter is located in the foot, abdomen, bladder, ribs, or chest and can be reached with your probe, and it is possible to incise around it, then you should make an incision around it, taking care not to cut any veins or nerves; extract it, and stitch up the wound if necessary, and take care of it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps for removing splinters:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They should have tips shaped like bird beaks, made with saw-like edges that grip the splinter without letting go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Some are made small, large, few or many, depending on the size and shape of the splinter and the width of the wound and its obstruction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave probe tip that can fit into the concavity of the splinter to relieve its insertion and push out any hard splinters.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the hard probe tip:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, as if the intestine inside is to be relieved in the concave sac and compressed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	When a vein must be cut open for phlebotomy (bloodletting) purposes.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins to be bled for phlebotomy are those of which it is customary to bleed every thirty days. In the head, there are sixteen such veins. Thus, there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called "auriculares"; two herbs that appear in both temples, and two veins appearing in the eyes, called "lacrimales" (tear ducts); a vein in the middle of the forehead, and one at the end of the nose; two jugular veins, and two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip, which are called "angelic"; and two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are bled in the arms are five; Of those five, one is the cephalic, and it is the left latissimus vein, which people call "the vein of the head," and it is shallow, a middle vein, composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; this one they call "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is tapped in the dominant cubital vein, and it is called "cubital," and people call it "vein of the abdomen" in common speech; the brachial, which is found near the elbow, and is the one that is bled, and it appears above the elbow prominently; the cephalic vein, which is between the two aforementioned ones; and the median cubital, which is found between the two aforementioned pulses, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of these is the one that follows the curve of the inner border of the latissimus vein; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the dominant cubital vein; the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the latissimus vein; and in the calf there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The help of the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it is to shave the patient's head, and to fry the patient's head in the occiput in the location of both veins covered with a large, thick cloth; hold the patient's neck with a bandage that allows both veins to appear in two places at the base of the skull; and have that done by you, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your fingers, try it here.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, which is pointed, and insert it below the vein into the caudal bone up to where phlebotomy occurs at the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And you lift your hand with the vein and bone to the incision sites above, and make an incision on the vein with the pointed lancet.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be approximately two fingers, or around that, and draw out the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Hold the pulse firmly and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision and cauterization of these.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the help of phlebotomy is for ancient migraines, chronic headaches, and recurrent otalgias (ear infections).
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: tighten the patient's neck and bring it forward until both veins appear to your sight, and feel their pulse with your fingers; then try it here.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Approach you lift the bandage over the vein at the groins as indicated, and introduce the lancet obliquely below, then lift the vein upward; incise it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to your necessity's quantity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Approach you loosen the patient's coartation (or bandage), and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then press firmly on that spot and knead it gently above with strong pressure, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now we have prepared the recall of their (the veins) names and the incision, and we begin with the beginning of the treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the benefit of frontal vein lancing is similar to that of the temporal vein for ancient facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of lancing depends on what I recommend to you; it is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is called the trepan or drill, whose form is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the drill on the prominent part of the vein and strike it obliquely or by some other means in the manner specified, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes it is opened with a lat lancet (or large lancet), but not necessarily that the lancing should be of sharp extremity like other lancets, it should be of broad extremity, and lance it transversely, because the bone is close and strong, and the lancet would easily break in it if it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The benefit of the two veins that are in the eyelids due to scabies (or crustiness) in the eyelids caused by headaches and inflammation, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage, and then lance those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Make the lancing transverse to the longitude slightly and do a few shallow lancetings because in that location there is not much flesh, and if the lancet is thin, its tip is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and press on those areas, and hold them for a moment, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	However, the lancing of the nasal vein is useful for acute fever and violent sodas (or sneezing), and facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, and inflammations that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck and you hold your left hand near their nose, and take a thin, long lancet and place it in the middle of the nostril according to right angle, because the vein does not appear by touch there, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must finish the lancing little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity, and hold it for a moment, because it is easily restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the benefit of lancing the two guiding veins leads to the constriction of the alae (or wings) and the beginning of leprosy and various diseases, as well as impetigo and corrosive ulcers such as herpetiformis.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of lancing those veins is that the patient holds each one in their neck gently; and the artist stands over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And lance the long vein with a wide, shallow lancet little by little; and extract the blood according to a measured amount or according to what you see is necessary at that moment; and make it look like the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And release the bandage and gently constrict both veins with moderate pressure to avoid causing discomfort to the patient, and leave them for a few days as the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The benefit of lancing the alar veins is associated with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corrosion of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of lancing those veins is that you ask the patient to sit down in front of you, hold their neck with a bandage, and then roll back their lips and observe the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of both, and it is more evident because there are small black veins around them; and then incise each one with an oblique incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	However, if you have doubts, and do not know which one is the greater of those, then you should incise the more obvious one and of the pustule that is present.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make them look like the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is customary to incise more often the vein that is on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More than two veins that are now joined together support the faucomy of the cephalic in precautions that are in the gullet, to treat illnesses of the uvula, and mouth illnesses.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of faucomy in that case is such that it follows the patient's mouth, lifts the tongue out of the way, and looks at one side of a vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is darkening to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then faucomy each one; be careful not to press your hand in faucomy of those, because they are arteries afterwards.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are faucomy in the neck are those that run through all men, and the faucomy of theirs is done according to two methods, or they are filled with mirtilat or olive oil in thinning; or they are sealed with a cautery knife and called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is one that requires cutting, and of these small and thin latzes (a unit of measurement) according to the width of the veins and the narrowness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Mirthil form of faucomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The latzes of it should be thus, and it is necessary to open the convex veins full of blood that appear thick, and at those that contain coarse clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil faucomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this faucomy is smaller and has a thinner end, and it requires faucomy of thin veins that contain thin blood from lemons.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the aid of faucomy of the basilica vein is useful, which is one of three veins: because it drains the blood from illnesses that are in the gullet and neck, and of what seizes the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the faucomer, when faucomy of that (vein), to keep it and be cautious with it, because there is an artery afterwards, and if he makes a mistake and adjusts in the puncture of the faucomy, he will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is not advisable to faucomize that with a penetrating faucomy, but rather cut it with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you seek another one or find one of its branches; or faucomize in the place of the end of the arm, because that is evident; and seal that with alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Moreover, if you wish to faucomize the vein in the middle of the arm, then it is necessary in front of its narrowing where you know the location between the wrists, and place your hand over it with a cloth; and place your finger on it and cut the vein with concave secession using alnessil as we have said; and be careful to avoid percussion in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel it, as if it is tightening, apply pressure at the location that you have pointed out with a cloth, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood flowing from the faucomy as if it is urine of a child and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and you should press your finger and hold it for a long time; and remove your finger, and if the blood is cut off, which often happens, then you should tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch the patient for discharge from it, and be cautious not to shake it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Moreover, if the blood does not stop flowing, and sometimes you do not have medicine available at that time, then you should cut the artery if it appears; because its end is constricted, and the blood stops; or take scissors and cut it, and pick up one cloth and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowing between the palm and fingers until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops flowing, that is good; otherwise, you should treat it with whatever remedy follows the reminder of the location of the powders that stop bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The stopping of blood from it is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the hand slipping on the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, faucomy of the dark vein is useful for draining blood from the subclavian part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the phlebotomist must be cautious when performing a phlebotomy on that individual, since it is a nerve; and if you adjust during the phlebotomy and bruise the nerve, it will cause numbness, healing will be difficult, and recovery will not be complete. This nerve can sometimes be felt with care; however, it may be hidden in some individuals and subtle, not being visible. In such cases, the phlebotomy must be performed without that nerve, and you must avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then make the vein incision longitudinally (along its length).
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and alleviates headaches in patients.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	It is appropriate in this case that if you wish to phlebotomize the olive vein or the myrtle vein, since it is safe from all veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must be careful that during the phlebotomy you do not puncture the vein too deeply, and look for a less sensitive area, and not notice it if it is not felt at first with the initial percussion on that particular vein.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, a small abscess may occur in some individuals if it is not phlebotomized in the initial percussion, but this abscess will not be noticed until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its complications are numerous, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and with hope for its benefits and caution for the avoidance of diseases, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm: cephalic, basilic, or median cubital; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the morning and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	It should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since eating.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provides convenience and necessity or at night or during the day, in every hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	A child should not be phlebotomized before the age of twelve, a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month at the latest, and elderly women should not be phlebotomized who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	If someone wishes to be phlebotomized in some way, it is necessary to empty the intestines with a leon clyster before the phlebotomy, if there is an inflammation or fissure in the intestines, to prevent superfluous blood from accumulating in the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and not affecting the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Phlebotomy should not be performed on patients suffering from nausea or vomiting, nor on those suffering from illness or drunkenness until their condition has improved, nor on a patient with dropsy, and moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided in cases of colic pain, vomiting, abdominal disorders, multiplication of secretions and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, and any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Also consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medications if it is possible for you to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And consider taking a bath if there is no prohibition against it, or exercise for some exercise to make the blood more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy on that day in the afternoon, namely around three o'clock, as has been said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the foot of that person is kept on that day free from all animal and physical accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and any other similar accidents.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his case, ensure that the causes are present at his service for which the use of aromatics and fragrances, balms, and similar substances according to the quantity of possibility is customary among men.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a couch that is higher than the one of the person who should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And stretch out the patient's arm and press it with your hand two or three times, and tighten the ligature with straps or bandages for two repetitions.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The ligature should be tightened promptly, since a loose ligature or a ligature with excess can cause the flow of blood; or if it is to moisturize, then prevent the heart from beating.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And ensure that the person who should be phlebotomized presses his hands between them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy with a little ancient oil specifically; and the patient should place his left hand on that vein, away from the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein bulges a little, and the percussion is quiet since it is the vein that contracts like a cord when the phlebotomy is desired, and it is full of vitality and when the phlebotomy is performed on that one, it becomes contracted, and the phlebotomy is discovered; and the phlebotomy should not open the vein, and if it opens, it is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, to ensure that the bloodletter is held firmly and stimulated in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then hold the bloodletter in place, but if the vein is swollen in one area, then it's good; otherwise, you move to another area a little away from that spot or wait with haste, if the location isn't opened.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is opened, or the patient feels pain, then you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligament, because strong pressure can cause the wound to swell further, or enter into bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then move to another bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and the blood flows thinly and you fear that it will not flow the desired amount, then you move to another bloodletting at that spot and adjust the opening a little, and do so quickly before the location is opened, because in many people you should make few openings.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has already been opened, then do not move over it, because there is no excuse for any reason; and rest on a certain part of the oil hole, because it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this spot than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, make an oil hole in every bloodletting where you must prohibit crossing the blood vessels, and do so according to tradition and expert knowledge when resting one of them over the spot, because the blood is made thin and turned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large abscess is generated in the bloodletting spot, which often happens, especially if it does not stop bleeding on that day or during the vein incision, then you cauterize, and rest the spot on a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to make sure that the scab of the blood from that vein forms on its own or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or green discoloration remains in the spot for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, rest on some cause of aloe and rosemary dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamine or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often abscesses and growths require bloodletting from the basilica (a large artery in the neck).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness, then your compression should be on it; this growth is bad and harmful; so be careful that you rest on some cause of what was said, because strong bleeding from the artery will flow.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Make a poultice with something that is stiffening, so that the spot hardens, and take care of it with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from all people according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color that appears in the blood according to what happens.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, you leave it to settle until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you leave it until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for those who are strong and healthy and have a need for bloodletting on one day to have the bloodletting of the vein increased and the incision be large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those who are frail, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw it out in too many days, and that the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method of bloodletting from a vein is a cross-section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of lancing is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it is praised and considered safe as the lancing is performed according to both length and width (literally: This manner of lancing is free from flow of blood and entry into nerves, and is laudable and safe that lancing is done according to length and width [according to its dimensions]).
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	If fainting usually occurs during the lancing, you should take care of that person before lancing with a small piece of bread soaked in milk-grain wine or simple scalded oil, and extract the blood in three or four viewings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If it is a complication, then take care before lancing by soaking in an embrocation of myrrh or scented honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in scented and strong-smelling embrocation.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs during the lancing and it is caused only by blood, then you must drink water of meat and a subtle-smelling embrocation; and use aromatics and limit their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to reduce their arm and dissolve the blood in stages according to observation, must do it on someone from whom lancing is for major evacuation, and its virtue is fennel, which gradually evacuates the small amount of blood, just as the strength of the virtue lasts continuously for several days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	However, whoever wants to reduce their arm and expel the blood in stages, and their body is strong, must do it approximately seven or nine hours after the first lancing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	However, whoever wants to direct the blood from their body in the opposite direction of the flow from which it is descending, must be reduced on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	However, in a body where there is already warm blood that is acute and causes fever, it must be expelled from the blood in one viewing and a large amount must be expelled and the opening increased before fainting occurs, since you will have kept all the conditions of lancing; and place your hand on the pulse of the arm to prevent death in the place of fainting, because many times death results when the lancer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary when you want to remove the arm and expel the blood in stages, if the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult only for the blood to come out, that you press on it with great force and stretch it slightly, because this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Wait until it is time to lance again; or remedy the lancing that was acute and coagulated blood in the vein orifices; or place a mustard plaster or sage leaf, and compress lightly until the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if there is a need to expel the blood in stages and there is no excuse, then you should make an incision on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the sheath of the arm" is lanced in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not twisted or hidden, because it consists of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the lancing is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the probe becomes swollen and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And apply strength to that with a moderate narrow strap; and lance transversely, not longitudinally or according to the width.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the opening wide and make your lancing with the one that you lance on the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, move your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the summer days, you are exempt from moving your hand in hot water, and in winter the body of the blood is paused in hot water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And lancing of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no pulse or nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the lancing of the tendon of the right hand is applied to liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of lancing is that you tighten the hand with a strap or your own hand, then place it in hot water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the eye; and make the lancing transverse; and if this is not found in all cases, it will not be known in the result.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Maintain that your hand should not endanger the phlebotomy, as nerves of the said area are now exposed by skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Approach the hand into the water's rear and allow the blood to flow in that, for if you do not approach it into the water's rear, the blood will coagulate in the vein's opening, and flowing is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is withdrawn according to the required quantity, then pause over the oil and salt vein so that it is not hardened excessively; similarly, you must do this for every narrow branch.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, the advantage of the phlebotomy on that from the left hand is that it helps with the diseases of the liver.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy there as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	Moreover, the advantage of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menstruation, and lung diseases and ulcers in chest and groin areas, and their similarities with other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and searches for a friction spot where veins appear; and on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein, it should be pointed to, and from that it branches out in the face of the foot many ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, phlebotomy the bladder or the groin area should be done on a larger vein, for it is better and more accessible.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are below there on the foot's surface, and pause your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize transversely, as if you want to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And may your phlebotomies be sharp.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Moreover, drawing blood is forbidden; therefore, immerse the foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow there until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first examination, immerse it again with the phlebotomy in another small area, for the location is salt; do not fear the evil, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly, do this with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, its location as we have said should be pointed below the wilderness of the hip.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	Moreover, the advantage of the phlebotomy there is for back pain when it is due to blood clot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient enters into bath, and quickly and forcefully compresses the buttocks of the lower back up to four fingers' width under a long thin bandage, for it will not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, then phlebotomize that according to any method that is possible for you and transversely, which is better; or incise that through incision or cut that through section, for the location is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	This is in many men with diminished sensation; and if that disappears, and it does not appear to the touch, then phlebotomize one of its branches, and it is the one that appears at the back of the foot near the said auricular and anular veins.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard yourself from the nerves, and let blood flow in the amount that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return the narrowing, and pause over the location of the phlebotomy spot, for it will heal easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding venuction and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venuctions are of corns, or of erysipelas, or of veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Venuction is performed in two ways: one by scoring and drawing blood, and the other without scoring.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This venuction that is without scoring is in two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the venuctions that are performed with scoring and bloodletting are in twelve locations of the body, among which one is where phlebotomies are applied, and it is the back of the neck; and the middle of the two collars; and venuctions on the chin below the lower jaw; and venuctions of both palms; and venuctions of the alohoster, and it is at the end of the cavity; and venuctions of both eyeballs, and they are two arms' length; and venuctions of both hipbones; and venuctions of both thighbones.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Venuction does not draw blood but from small, scattered veins in the skin, and therefore it does not acquire its virtue through them, as it is in phlebotomy; nor should venuction be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if necessity requires venuction due to disease or continuous bleeding, administer it at the beginning and end of the month, and in its middle and any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men when blood accumulates before it needs extraction through venutction and becomes severe headache, dizziness, and nausea; and in those who suffer from repletion and heat in their face and on their head, and in their neck; and in those who suffer from excessive perspiration in the face and forehead, and darkness and heaviness in their eyes; and in those who lose the location of their venutction; and in those who have an increased appetite for blood, or whose tongue is protruded and spits blood; and in those who have excessive dreaming, and those who see blood during sleep, old age, plagues, and similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when in some cases of that kind, and particularly if it occurs on the third day or the fourth, then command vomiting to be induced after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	In addition to vomiting, it is also helpful when that condition causes heaviness in the head and if it leads to filling of the ears. But it must be complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This vomiting is in the location of cranial lancing (or trepanation).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not appropriate to use it in the case of a complete fracture or one with catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	It is not necessary to use it on the elderly, and in cases of fractured skulls with diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But in the case of someone who is continually vomiting, it is necessary to command the vomitor to pause his hand slightly on the sides of the mouth, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness (or confusion).
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Vomiting at the neck is in the location of lancing of the dark vein (or basilic vein) and the jugular: it causes asthma, constriction of the trachea and scissure of the tracheal cartilage, coughing, and suffocation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is necessary to force the vomiting at the neck to be a little sharp, because if it is paused, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Vomiting at the temples causes headaches and otitis (inflammation of the ear), migraines, fever, dental pain, and it is in the location of lancing of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It is necessary to command the vomitor not to press his hand with a laceration, to avoid puncturing an artery and causing bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Vomiting below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and resembles other diseases of the mouth, and is in the location of lancing of the alar vein which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Vomiting made between the two hands causes croup, which is caused by suffocation with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Vomiting between the two openings of the eyes also contributes to lancing of three veins, namely the basilic, dark, and cephalic, because it draws the blood from all those veins which are located in the flesh, and those small veins of the other veins into which the blood is drawn before it reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the vomitor not to proceed with laceration, because the area is bare of flesh and there are nerves and arteries nearby.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This vomiting is made on the shoulders and causes diarrhea in the anus and ulcers below it.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary to command the vomitor that it should be a large vomiting, and of iron, because the location requires deep incision; and strong blunt vomitings with fine edges should be used, and it should be lacerated with a laceration.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Smaller vomitings at the legs manifestly show blood from all over the body, cause old diseases of the lungs and womb, and the bladder; they induce menstruation, and cause hemorrhoids and edema; they are in the location of lancing of two saphenous veins, and the anterior and posterior cubital.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it does not weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the bladders, when they are suspended, the help is similar to the aid of two bladders. (Translation)
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the bladders is that you stop the ventose at the beginning by gentle suction and do not prolong its position, but stop it lightly, and leave it in place moderately, and let the humors come to the place by natural passage. (Translation)
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop doing this and continue until the place becomes red and swollen, and the pus appears from the wound. (Translation)
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you make a small incision and gently drain the pus little by little, and be careful in the position of the body. (Translation)
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Since that man is of tender flesh with rare pores, you should make an incision once and not too deep, to prevent the place from becoming ulcerated. (Translation)
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Instruct the lancer that he should widen the incision slightly and deepen it gently, and collect the pus easily. (Translation)
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the pus is thick, it is necessary to make an incision twice, as in the first incision, the way of sublimation to the pus and its moisture will be opened. (Translation)
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second incision, it is necessary to achieve the thorough scrutiny of the extraction of the thick pus. (Translation)
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the pus is very foul-smelling, make a third incision to achieve the final result. (Translation)
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or in small quantities, it suffices for us with one incision. (Translation)
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a lot of pus, we must make a deep incision; and if we suspect that the pus is thick, it is necessary to make a deep incision. (Translation)
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "incision" only refers to the depth of the cut. (Translation)
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the cut is thick, hard, black and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to soften the places of the bladders with oil of aloe or violet oil, oil of marigold, camomile oil, or oil of thistle in summer; and if it is winter, use oil of garlic, oil of lily, oil of camomile, or oil of wine. (Translation)
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick, you should use oil of turpentine or oil of balsam, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, etc. (Translation)
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the lancer has wide pores of tender flesh, it is necessary to prohibit oil and use warm water or water from saltwater, water of vinegar, water of figs, or water of wormwood for washing the bladder areas. (Translation)
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	If the pus is very wet, wash the bladders with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, etc. (Translation)
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	If the excesses are thick, wash the bladders with old vinegar or water of sage, wormwood, dill, camomile, etc. (Translation)
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It is necessary to protect the bladder from bathing; having it administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two and sleeping near the bladder. (Translation)
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary to bleed a bladder before lancing it. (Translation from Latin)
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	You must first consider: it is necessary to consider if the lancer or the one who is to bleed is colic and has cold on the sharp and inflamed pus, you should take cooling causes such as millgrana acetosa, and vinegar, wine, and anise, etc. (Translation)
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Place food for them in this way as if it were porridge, and provide cooked chicken broth, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and foods resembling those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	For the one whose complexion is cold, it's necessary to have him drink elderberry syrup or absinthe made from seeds, sumac, and a fragrant spice between autumn and winter; and recommend that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid porridge, canabis, pissers, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	It's necessary that on the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia, drinking should be greater than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It's necessary to give some men tyriac alpharac or medicines made of musk, mastic, or alcela during ventozacio or fleubotomia or around that time, so that the main organs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and it's not necessary for them to take that salt.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventozas that are incisions should be incisions of the liver, and on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the anus, because these members do not tolerate incision upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And for those, it's not incision but the attraction of blood from a member, such as making an incision on the nipple in anemia caused by bleeding from the nose; and they use this to dissolve cold, inviscid vapors in a member, such as making an incision on the abdomen or umbilicus; because that makes the member rarefied, scalds it, and reduces pain, which resolves vapors.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And an incision has already been made on the throat when it happens in their paralysis or palsy, because by the strong power of attraction, it relieves paralysis and eradicates palsy from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, an incision made on the liver or spleen removes vapors trapped in them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These incisions are administered using only juice, while others are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Others are administered with hot water in the sicknesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the incision is filled and is as large as possible, which is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The method of incision with fire: the size of the orifice should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of the probe should be the width of a palm; and in the longitude of it, at the location that is on the circumference, the length should be the same, but the depth should be small according to the amount that fits an awl into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made with a linen cloth or lemon, with thick edges, lion's wool, and clean and smooth to avoid injuring the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a crossbar made of linen or iron should be placed where the candle is held with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this incision should be much larger than the one we recommended earlier; and the size of it should be smaller according to the sickness and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the incisions for infants and extended ones are different from those for young men with thick chests.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of making this incision with fire on the member is to extend the flesh with fire gently in front of a small amount of wax candle, and make it over the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the incision, so that the fire is ignited away from the patient's body to prevent burning the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be made over the patient's member, and the incision should be made over the crossbar that we have mentioned, until when we have incisions and do not need to stretch the skin and allow the vapor to come out over the crossbar, then the incision will quickly dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And burn the flesh according to its method, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in an incision administered in the sickness of plague, with water, without a crossbar or probe, and it is not filled but only made on the member itself.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its method: The larger the incision, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 75.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuggas are not administered in any member except in members where the position of incisions is not possible due to their small size, such as the eyelid and its similar parts; or in a denuded member of flesh, such as the nose and its similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have found sanguisuggas in clean, purified waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Prepare the patient's day and night in warm water until they are comfortable, and ensure no cause remains in their stomach from this; prepare for evacuation of the body at the beginning with flebotomy and ventose; prepare to treat the patient's limbs until they swell up; prepare bandages over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When the stomach is filled and relaxed, and no cause remains within it; when the body has been evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventose; when the limb has swollen; when the bandages are applied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out fluid from the affected area with a ventose, it is more beneficial as an aid.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the area with warm water and apply salt water; rub and press it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body's blood persists in the wound, it is necessary to place leeches at the wound site, and let them absorb the excess blood; then insert a piece of cloth dipped in cold water over the wound until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle vitriol trisulfate or similar antihemorrhagic substances onto it until the blood is drained; or bandages soaked in powdered fav beans are applied, and they are left in place until the beans adhere to the wound, and the blood is drained.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repeated use of leeches, when possible replacing them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the use of leeches is prohibited, rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the wound until it bleeds; then apply bandages, as when they sense any bleeding, they will immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish to make them fall, sprinkle a little aloe powder or salt or ashes on them, and they will crumble immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of the third procedure: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter deals with necessary observations in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations due to accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who do not attend to the books of the ancients or read a single letter from them, boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, this method of the learned in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it for a time being of everything; and I have not applied it immediately, but by long reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted their science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And approach experimentation and study in the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my science and on which my experiment has been passed; therefore, here I abridge it for others and relieve it of the occupation of prolongation; I abridge it in the end of abridgement; and in the end of declaration, I show it; and I form many forms of the instruments that are administered in this case, as is done by addition of description, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the restoration of fractured limbs and various ones of each type.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, we must state in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters at the understanding of which the artist stands and waits for the truth of these matters; you and those who are quick to learn or know this noble art of yours.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or wound occurs, it is necessary to start immediately with flebotomy or leeching of that limb, or whatever else, if no cause is prohibited, such as debility of virtue, or the person in whom it occurred has been injured, or the person is elderly and decrepit, or it is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And ensure that the food is cold, consisting of herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and any filling or all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of matter exuding from the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their usual diet that they are accustomed to.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in protein and heavy in consistency, containing viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, cabbage, beans, beef, veal, liver of cows, hog's fat, fresh fish, large vegetables, and similar foods, and with this diet, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Know that the bones crushed in young men and the elderly cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times due to the dryness of those limbs, and they are consolidated and continued at the end of infancy, such as the bones of infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects certain causes similar to glue in the case of a broken bone from all parts, which results in thickening that adheres to it until it is consolidated, leaving it firm, such as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	It is necessary to stop the food of the patient, food that is heavy, viscous and thick, as mentioned earlier.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variation in fractures depends on the differences in body parts.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the differences in body parts, for the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	Remember all kinds of fractures, explained in their own separate chapters.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fractures is in itself obvious.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Fractures of bones are diverse in their characteristics; for example, there is the bowed fracture, which occurs at the joints; and some fractures are characterized by the length of the bone: and those of the femur and tibia and others, whether they occur or not, such as when it happens at the writing pen, and it is a fracture with wound and disruption in the skull, and it is the fissured fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	Each type of fracture has its own treatment or torment in the healing process, as will be explained separately in their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	By this is recognized the fracture of a bone: it is the twisting of the limb, and from this protrusion and sensation of it, and only when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no apparent twisting in the location or it does not occur when you touch the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If it is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, then you should press and compress the area with your hand, wait for the appropriate medicine to be applied at that moment; and keep it tight by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that the location where it is bowed but not split in two or any other condition that does not occur at the thigh, such as when the entire circumference of its shaft is affected, then you should begin the healing process by applying a cauterizing ointment to it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If there is cauterizing ointment applied, then you should leave it for several days until the ointment stops; and apply heat to it according to any method that you can in a gentle and skillful manner.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the healing of the affected area and the draining of it is easier than drilling a bone where there is such a fracture.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Strengthen the affected area according to what will be explained later.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there is such a fracture, then it is necessary to extend the broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with both hands if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and one hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place the affected limb in a position according to its natural form while the fractured parts are being extended, then you should proceed by carefully returning these additions with skill and in their respective locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful not to harm the patient through your action or injury, and proceed according to your strength by applying one bone to another in the best possible ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary that at that time you touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause here, correct it and compress it according to the quantity of your power.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do by causing abscesses to occur through their actions, or by causing contraction in the limb, as we have seen in the actions of their foolish colleagues.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Provide support, alignment and proper operation and restriction of the affected limb, rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this matter and make him lie quietly when he is in his vigil or sleeping, observe his rotation and agitation, and provide for all his needs, and provide all his movements with all your power; wait until the position of the affected limb is a position that relieves the pain, which is because he feels discomfort in the position of the injured limb; then it is necessary to change its position to one that does not cause pain; and be aware that the position of this should be straight and aligned so that the limb does not twist when it is healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the compression of the immobilized limb is what I recommend, for you should know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	For those that are small, such as the arm and thigh and similar to these, it is necessary that the bandage be made of thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	However, for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the bandage be thick and strong, because the broad coverage strengthens the entire limb with compression, so that no infection enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	First, begin by adjusting the alignment, stopping at a convenient place, over the location of the fracture with three or four bandages according to the needs of the member; and apply gentle pressure with one hand on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Approach that person to the place of the fracture with sovereignty, and stretch the muscles so that your compression does not tighten the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Approach that person a little to the place of the fracture, and gradually relax the tightness, so that you take a great distance from the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Take another bandage and cover the observed location with it, and approach the bandages to a distance from the fracture; make your operation on the compression of the bandage and in the relaxation of that as you said in the first covering above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Approach the soft leather or cloth that has been rolled up and tied to straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; but do not pause for any other reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Approach the other bandage and approach the small, well-made steel needles as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or cauterized wound in the location, and then pause over the area of the wound and that which treats the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then apply pressure to the steel needles.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The needles should be made of the finest cane reed or bamboo, well-formed; or made of pine wood; or made of ramps from palm trees; and their width should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the needle that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than other needles, and the length of the needle according to the size of the limb; apply pressure on the needles with another bandage according to your previous compression; and apply oil or ointment on top of the needles as we have said for compression, and it should be your compression according to the location of the fracture more, and when further away from the fracture, decrease the compression.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	It is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the procedure of some foolish people using thicker threads like ropes, it is a great error when tightening the compression unevenly.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not appropriate, because you will not be able to achieve the desired compression with them, and it is necessary that there be a space of one finger between each needle.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is pierced by the extremities of the stars near the narrow place in those locations, then pause it with a cushion made of leather or wool until it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are similar to a wound, and happen in the collarbone, and it will come to remembrance in that section regarding individual cases.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken member is not stricken with stars on the first day; this is because when the member, which is large, does not require immediate pressure on the stars but rather after three to seven or more days, depending on your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess caution.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plaster with which the ancients restored them, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of common plaster reinforced for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more so for women and children because it is made of something that does not require heat or moisture: take powder from grinding, and it is the marrow of flour that you must grind in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it as follows: unless you filter it through egg whites, and allow the mixture to be neither thin nor delicate; and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aloe, myrrh, and aloewood, which is measured from 1000 grams; of frankincense and oil of lavender 500 grams; alcohol 2000 grams; all should be crushed and sifted and mixed with water or egg white if the complexion of the patient is scalded; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh, oil of aloe, white clay 10 drachms; frankincense and oil of lavender 5 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; Armenian pitch 20 drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be ground in a mortar with a pestle, filtered, strained, and mixed with water or egg whites, and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for dislocated joints and separated bones in those places, and for relieving pain in those places and for treating fissures and fractures: take sheep's wool and soak it in sour wine and oil of cedar and place it over the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, of abscess caution and expelling pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy, grind them together to make a plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster that reinforces the restoration of broken bones and when desired, resolves the presence of abscess: recipe for marigold, chamomile, violets, oats, and all parts. All should be ground with wine if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it is scalded, then prepare it with water from hydrangea or water and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster with a strong healing effect in the resolution of hardened abscesses that the first does when there is a need for the restoration of the member: recipe for marigold, its seeds, and balm, mallow, majoram, violets, camomile, all parts and honey; grind them all with water of elder or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the state of the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates did not specify in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration unless it is made of beeswax and oil, and not another cause; he recommended that it should be moderately thick rather than too thin or too thick.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Gaul it is seen that they are placed on a broken member for its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccation with low heat are as follows: myrrh, incense, and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that strengthens wounds and pain: recipe made with chicory, cress, human skin or hare's pen, and marigold, salt, all parts ground, filtered, strained, and mixed to make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity that must remain tied and be carefully undone, is considered if there is no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken out of place, then you should not untie for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If the place is affected by strong pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should tie or untie it at that time, and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take linen cloth and sea sponge, wring it out with warm water, then immerse that in hot water and wash the affected area until the swelling and pain cease; let the member rest for an hour; place over it wool soaked in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and leave it there for a night to ensure that the abscess is cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain be alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Apply a gentle and subtle pressure and plaster to that narrow place and do not strain it with your initial constriction, until it heals gently.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If the abscess, the burning, the pain and inflammation and all the symptoms are already subsided, and you do not need plaster and pressure anymore, then you loosen that area as you did at the beginning of the constriction.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If no cause affecting the member occurs as described before, then you should not untie it but rather wait for three or four or seven days. And some weeks everything is left for twenty days according to what appears due to the member's untying, as described before, until the fracture heals and the flesh comes together around it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then you should tighten the constriction more than your initial constriction and adjust the swelling of the patient's food, as the memory of it is recounted before.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the fracture site already drying out and extending more than necessary, then you should know that nourishment must not reach there; therefore, it should be wrapped in hot water throughout every observation of it; and this should be for three days; and loosen the constriction slightly, and by this operation, let the member receive nourishment, and heal gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But those who restore the fracture of the member late when it is not restored at the beginning, as required, and it is restored incorrectly, according to their operation, is an error, and there is great fear, and if they had followed the Ancients in their books and acted accordingly, they would have increased the danger.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone do this, so it is reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are various, and the shapes of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for one kind of fracture is made by percussion of a blow, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is then broken off, as in the case of a club, and this type of fracture is called an open fracture; or the blow cuts some part of the bone, and also cuts through the flesh but does not pass beyond its end; and this type of fracture of the bone is called complete lifting.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or separated; and its cause is a blow with a hammer or bludgeon on stone, and similar things.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture is penetrating and approaching the panicle which is outside the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this type of fracture is hollowed out in the bone, in the small subtlety of hair and therefore it is called this species of capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this type of fracture is made either by bludgeon or blow on stone and similar things, which causes some layer of the bone to be driven into its fissures, and it occurs in concave areas as when it happens to plows when struck and is split into its fissures.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Moreover, this type of fracture occurs in moist bone cores, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are treated like separated stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I return to the recollection of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fracture by detection on them and by the examination of them with tests and excision of rotten flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary species is recognized by this that it appears on the bone and is scraped off, and the edges are smoothed over with a test, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and then if you see by manifest signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar things in greater dispositions, do not doubt that it will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see symptoms that do not indicate danger, then you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The initial sentence to translate is: "La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"If it is during the summer days, then you must take care of the bone alignment by the 7th day, because it may be spoiled by the fat and accidents as we have recommended."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the fat covering the brain, and it is divided into small parts and stirred up, then you must compress the crushed and stirred-up pieces as I will recommend to you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"You should examine the head of the affected patient, and uncover the bone according to your custom and skill as you can, following the shape of the injury, and make it easy for the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"If you find the bone, blood flow or an abscess, then do what is necessary and be careful not to make it worse. Soak a piece of cloth in wine and warm oil, place it on the injury until the abscess subsides and the bleeding stops; ensure that the wound does not bleed again; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and its removal."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this procedure is one of two ways for surgery."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first method is that you compress the bone with a straight pair of forceps like this: And hold another pair of forceps a little further back like this:"
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"Then move the forceps further back."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"It is necessary that you have several pairs of forceps of different sizes, some of which are longer than others, and some shorter with the tips at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"Use them carefully when striking the forceps to avoid hitting the head and causing pain for the patient."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is hard and strong, you must bore through it before applying forceps with wedges, which are called non-penetrating wedges."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"These wedges are not called so because they do not reach the end of the bone, rather, at their edge is a rounded or angled part that is opposite to the sharp point of the bone, which prevents them from being submerged and passing through the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"It is appropriate that you take many of these wedges, the number of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull whose edges are sharp, the length and width according to the thickness of that bone."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the form of three types of wedges: The purpose of using a wedge to pierce the fractured bone is that you place the wedge on the bone and rotate it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the wedge to another location, and insert a piece that is suitable for the size of the ray or environment around it."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"Then insert the forceps between each crack in the bone, and insert a piece that is as thin as possible at the end of the crack, as we have said, until you split the bone or with your hand or another cause using tools such as chisels and small forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"It is necessary that you take great care that the forceps do not touch any blood vessels."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And so when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the blood vessels, if they are separated, you must extract them; then you should saw and file the sharp edge of the bone with another tool similar to forceps, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other forceps."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"If there remains any small splinters or rough edges of the bones, you should remove them carefully with whatever tools are necessary; and then clean and lubricate the wound as we have said."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the second method of surgery is simpler and less risky, known as Guillotine or longitudinal traction; and this is its explanation: it is necessary at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the place where it is most visible and pronounced, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at the end of the forceps, the shape of which is as follows:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"The lenticular fracture is concave and does not pierce anything, and the angular fracture is two-edged along its length, as sometimes; the lenticular fracture should be adjusted to the blood vessels with the convex side of the forceps piercing the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"Then strike the forceps of one fracture with a small hammer until you compress the entire bone, as it is rotated, and you ensure that the fat does not enter in any way that you fear; if the patient was the most foolish and ignorant of all men, certainly, he would be asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If a bone within the panicle (possibly meaning 'the soft part of the body') is broken at some locations of the bone, you shall cut it with the pointed instrument at the round end, and release it easily as it will be freed from harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft part of the body, and what is separated or remains of the bone is the face (possibly meaning 'the outer surface') of it, and it remains rough with coarse protrusions and fine fissures, then you must smooth out that roughness and remove those fissures with fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that it will be possible for you to administer the most suitable medications at all locations on its surface and the correct direction of the treatment according to where you find yourself lost during your operation on the broken bone and the shape of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	You must apply the ointment to it (the fractured bone) with which you will smoothen the bones at the beginning using those fine razors, and place it near the fine substance of it, and do not stop doing so until you have completely covered all its parts with the healing ointment and the fine substance.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But for small and subtle fractures (possibly meaning 'hairline fractures'), you must administer care according to what is needed for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is due to the fact that not all the causes have been studied in that discipline (possibly meaning 'field' or 'subject').
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it should be based on what has been shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the soft part of the body is rectangular when you smooth the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the wound; and take another cloth folded or triple-folded and immerse it in vinegar and oil and place it on the first cloth lightly, but not too much that it causes swelling; and apply a liniment lightly to it, and do not press down too hard unless necessary for the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave it (the fracture) with this care for a day or two until you are sure that it has formed a scab; and then remove the scab and administer medicines to prevent dryness, such as linseed oil, flour of eggs, powder of incense and aromatics, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you should make a powder of these medicines that is finely ground over the wound, for example dry substances; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that have the ability to stop bleeding and not cause irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Keep the wound clean during its healing process, and do not let it get infected with any other substances; nor should you allow anything to add more toxicity to it. For when it is covered by the soft part of the brain (possibly meaning 'the membrane covering the brain'), it corrupts it and causes harm to the patient, and brings about a malignant ill effect on them.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	If there is swelling in the head (possibly meaning 'swelling in the skull'), when the bone has been treated and especially when the care of it is given, it becomes black in its surface; therefore consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, as they can be dangerous without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness does not come from the medicine applied to it, but rather due to the nature of the medicine itself causing that effect, then you must take honey in one part and warm oil in three parts. and wrap that linen around the swelling; and care for it with the appropriate healing herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On repairing the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose that is broken, but rather two parts of it are broken together with one or more perforations, for there are two bones in it, and the fracture does not occur in one part but rather stretching, twisting, and swelling.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small instrument into the nose and hold the fracture inside it with the pointed end from both sides until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do this with care and caution, ensuring that your treatment does not harm the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose and it does not penetrate that area, then you must adjust it with the tip of the finger where there is a small indentation.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, then you make it look as if it were whole.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cover the wound with lint or oil in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; otherwise, place a warm cloth over the wound and let it rest for 3-7 days using a cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of fabric into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or use two plugs, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be as thick as it fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some of the old restorers say that plugs should be covered in wax and kept in for the entire day, but I do not see it; however, it is necessary that the cotton be covered in oil of rosin with powdered chalk, and place it inside until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, insert your fingers into the nose instead of the plug, as long as it is wrapped in lion cloth; and if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This method is not necessary for you; and if you want to, do it, and if you want to, use plugs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another wound occurs again with cautery, pack the nose with beeswax or fat soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or lard.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no wound with cautery, it is necessary to pack it from outside with sizam flour and powdered hempseed mixed with oil of rosin; place your hand over the cotton wool, and do not let anything touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small or comminuted fracture, it is necessary to cut through them, and extract those using the appropriate instrument; then suture the wound, and take care of it with what heals and strengthens, and use the appropriate packing.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a boil occurs inside the nose, it is necessary to treat it with plugs and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not due to an abscess, examine whether the fracture is only outside, and if it is not broken in two and curved at the inner edges, its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and in the same way, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert the right index finger; and press gently to palpate the fracture inside with ease at the inner edges and the outer edge of the bone; do this carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, it is necessary to administer extension of both parts according to the straight line until possible alignment of the bone can be achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is loosening or disruption of teeth that you believe will remain attached by gold, silver, or ivory threads, place a cotton swab on the fractured jawbone, and a double layer of cotton over it, and a large piece of cloth stitched together, or a sole cushion of appropriate size along the length of the jaw; and apply that above according to your accessibility and appropriateness until it is no longer damaged.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Tell the patient to rest and take a gentle diet without spicy foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has been changed in any way, remove it on the third day; and correct what is already altered with oil of rosin, oil of linseed or flour of sizam, since you will have removed the beeswax, and place cotton wool over the packing.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the packing is attached and adjusted to the bone, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it heals and strengthens the fracture; since many weeks pass before this fracture becomes strong.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs again, administer what was mentioned in the previous sections for its treatment until it is healed, and remove the abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is due to an abscess, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or a sequestrum, and carefully remove those pieces with the appropriate instruments for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the abscess opening is narrow, expand it with a flebotome according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed the sequestrum and it does not heal, sew the abscess opening if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the appropriate packing materials over it and allow it to heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Whenever the collarbone is broken at its middle part, you should split open the muscles in that area, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It can be broken, separated, or separated into more than two parts which do not meet the joint; and it is easy to heal if this is the case; or it occurs with dislocation, making healing difficult; or the fracture involves a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in such a case, when the fracture involves a wound, is that two ministers should be present: one should assist and hold the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck to that area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bind the fracture with ropes tied together as necessary for its proper shape, and ensure that it is neither too protruding nor concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, then you should place the patient's shoulder under a blanket or wool and ensure its size according to your necessity; stretch and elevate the collarbone and press the shoulder with your hand inside the blanket until you bind the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to its opposite sides due to obstruction, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a medium-sized cushion over the muscles on that side.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscles on that side towards the center where the collarbone bone is lifted up to the protrusion and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ropes.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if there is dislocation or pain in the collarbone, you must cut it open and remove those dislocations with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is stuck in the bone, then make an incision into it with one of the cutting instruments you have prepared, as you had placed the collarbone on the grinding stone to sharpen it; and this tool is either a staff or iron, which has the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to the shape of a cauldron with its concavity facing downward, and its width should be according to your necessity, based on the size of the bone or the shallow area around it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	However, the length of this tool should be as long as is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have cut when you remove the dislocation from the bone is wide, and you are certain there is an abscess, then you should align the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, fill the wound with cloth and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess develops, fill it with wine and rose oil and let it sit.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	However, if the bone is broken and has a wound without dislocation, apply a plaster made of flour and egg whites, place it on a soft cloth (leopard skin), and place the hand on the other side of the patient, if necessary, and hold them with humemate, which is a rope that the Saracens twist. It should be long enough, and its width should be about one palm or slightly more; apply powder twice over the soft cloth and plaster; take a thin wooden stick whose width is three fingers and wrap it in fabric; wrap that cloth around the stick in the area above the fracture; apply humemate as needed, twist it around the stick, and move it back and forth over the bone and the patient's hand, reducing the swelling on all sides. Whenever the swelling decreases and is not hidden from you, repeat this process.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And that the stick does not harm the broken bone; and so you must check the patient every day, as when the injury is healing or the stick becomes soft, correct it and strengthen the connection.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Place the patient's head on their chest, and place a small cushion under their neck so that the assistant can support the lower part of the collarbone from its side, and thus raise the fracture of the collarbone to a higher position due to muscle elevation; or let the arms be tied to the patient's chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the plaster if there is no problem in that area or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Renew the plaster if you notice any problems with it, adjust its shape and reapply it, and let it remain until the fracture of the collarbone is healed and clotted.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It becomes strong and comfortable within 28 days, and in some cases it is made in a shorter period of time for men.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken at its lateral edge and not through the body, only the edges are broken.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the edge is broken—and it is broken at its middle part—and it cannot be identified without touching, you should prepare for it according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it as naturally as possible in any way you can manage.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place a cushion over the area filled with powder of milled alum and hulled poppy seeds, and place a double powder on it; and place another cushion on the leaden needle of the fine table according to the amount of the spatula or more slightly.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the needle is concave at any of the locations on the spatula, then plug the concavity with poppy seeds and adjust the needle according to its shape.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And apply a long, strong bandage with appropriate tightening and secure the needle firmly in its place so it does not move.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the liniment in every day, and whenever it is softened, apply another layer and tighten and adjust the needle if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Anoint the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this period has passed, you must dissolve the liniment, and be sure that it does not affect the bones from which it began nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If there is a problem with the bone pressing on, remove the bandage, then cut it, and proceed as mentioned in the treatment of the sacral furcula for abscess cauterization if this occurs.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	This is the title of the text, which translates to "On the Restoration of a Broken Foot." It seems like this treatise was actually discussing the treatment for gout (podagra) and hernia, but it appears that the author accidentally used the wrong title.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes a foot is broken in its middle part and it heals slowly; but the extremities of it move slightly, becoming swollen and inflamed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the middle part of the foot is broken, it may develop complications such as swelling and inflammation in the surrounding areas, causing severe pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and bloody vomiting; and the fracture can be detected by feeling a hollow space in the affected bone.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the foot is to support the patient on their back, place a cushion under them between their shoulders; and press the muscles of the affected area while adjusting the costal arches with your hands so they are at their maximum width, taking care in the operation and positioning according to every means possible and what is necessary, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place a plaster and dressing over the affected area, along with a thin lead or ivory needle on top of it, as you wrap it in fabric; be careful not to harm the fractured bone while applying it; move the splint according to the curvature of the back occasionally, tightening it appropriately; and always consider the splint and ensure that it is neither too loose nor too tight.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove the plaster due to corrosion or pain or an abscess that occurs in the area, you should cut and loosen it and remove the dressing while treating the problem as needed; and if the plaster needs to be adjusted, do so by removing some of it, and tighten it appropriately until healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the Restoration of Broken Ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in large parts where there are two; and the ends of their junctions do not contract due to the fact that they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The fracture cannot be detected by touch alone, so it must be investigated with questions.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be done by filling the fracture with questions according to what is possible, until it is filled in as needed, and applying plaster and tightening the affected bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is descending towards the internal junctions, you should administer painkillers and puncture the affected area like when treating pleurisy, thereby placing a linen cloth over it; and observe difficulty in breathing, coughing, and bloody vomiting; and this type of fracture is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancients were skilled in dealing with such problems using various methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And it is said that: the patient's diet should be restricted to prevent inflammation and bloating, so that the abdomen remains flat and the fracture is pushed out towards the junctions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we must be careful not to create conditions that could cause abscess cauterization unnecessarily, if possible; and if it occurs, help with the necessary treatment.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of the ancients said that the patient should avoid wind and drink with caution, as it is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that wind may attract superfluidity to the affected area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Some of the ancients said that: the affected area should be covered with wool soaked in heated oil, and powders placed between the ribs until it is filled; the splint should be adjusted according to curvature when wrapping it; and the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medication.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from intense constriction and cannot endure it, and the bones are punched with a blunt instrument at the affected spot, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location, expose the broken costa, and place a pad on top of the instrument that keeps the fracture in place, remember its position, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then adjust the lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and treat it with ointments inside until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If an abscess occurs internally, then you should collect it and pour red oil over it and let the patient heal from the internal abscess with what is needed for healing.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And turn the patient onto their side on the affected side until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and later the ligaments adhere to them, and similar things happen to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when something happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, consider that if their muscles are already softened, stupefied, and dead and cannot be healed or strengthened, and when you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle and there is no pain, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases the outcome is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if the muscles and pain occur in those areas and you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle, then you know that the neck bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar signs in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will heal or not, consider the weight of them.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they have already become softened, attend to those areas where something happened on the back, and when you press on their back, there is swelling and excretion without their will, and sometimes they are turned onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point do not bother with treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no such cause occurs, the prognosis is better and easier.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to perform cauterization of the abscess on the swollen vertebra, using red oil or beeswax, and let it heal over a few days until the abscess is cauterized.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a comfortable and soothing ointment or salve, and strengthen it with linen; and command the patient to rest, be calm, not sleep on the affected side until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you have to set the broken bone or any other cause that is already known from it, then you must saw off the protruding part of the bone; and then adjust the lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then treat it with a carbolized dressing until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the bone is broken in the heel, and it is at the end of the cavity, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and grasp the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible by equal measure; and then apply a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel a broken fracture there, then you must break it, remove it, and treat the wound with treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are often broken, and if they break, their fracture is not simply a crack in the ends but rather a comminution throughout the bone and it is driven into the length and declines to the inside; and when the patient experiences pain in the location and pricking, the anus becomes stupefied when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is to spread your hand over it until it covers the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you grasp it according to what is appropriate for equal grasp until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or has already descended to the inner parts of it, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Therefore, when you have grasped it, apply a plaster and then apply an elm or willow splint, and strengthen it by tightening the bandage so that there is no fear of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Grasp the hollow area with what fills it until the bandage takes on an equal tension, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their unaffected side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an abscess, you must stop extending it and the restoration of it until the abscess is cauterized, and apply what heals it according to what is prescribed; then return to restoring it, and strengthen it as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If this happens in the broken bones or they are comminuted, you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The shoulder joint is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat piece of wood about this size:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be attached to two ends with straps, and hang it from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient on a wheelchair; and place his broken arm inside the splint so that it reaches the elbow in the same location where the curve of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it with some cause of weight, or the servant extends it to the other side; and place the doctor and whoever is treating the fracture with their hands on it until the fracture heals as required.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their hand with a strap from their neck, and commands two servants to each hold something above and below the fracture with their hands; and each one extends it to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten both straps on the fracture and the other one, and each of the two servants extends it to their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it should be stopped halfway along the strap over the elbow and the other half should be on the side of the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then it should be stopped at that location and on the shoulder as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie it with ease and without effort, and then when it is tied as required and applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess formation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms, leave the strapping for up to seven days and wait until the abscess subsides; then soak the wound in warm vinegar and rose oil before tightening it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and place an enveloping cloth of new linen over the plaster; then adjust the arm in the splint and place a soft cloth over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Fold the cloth and tighten it over the splint so that the arm remains in a stable position, unless there is any reason forbidding it due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Use of steel pins.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And the steel pin should be thicker and stronger than the others; and there should be a space of one finger width between each pin, and the length of the pins should correspond to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And tighten the pins with the strapping mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	Your compression at the location of the fracture should be made tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	Here is the translation: And as the fracture becomes longer, the compression should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Here is the translation: And when you set the bones and loosen the compression as previously said at the time of restoring the member to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation: If you fear an abscess, leave the compression and the bones in place for seven days as previously said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here is the translation: Then consider the wound in all divisions for three days to prevent purulent or inflammatory occurrence at the location; or, food should not be brought near the member due to the surplus of compression; and thus correct everything as previously said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Here is the translation: However, if you are sure that no cause of this occurs, do not remove the ligature except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Here is the translation: The patient's bed should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Here is the translation: Place a cushion filled with wool on top of the broken limb, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the fracture figure should not be removed or dissolved; rather, the ligament should be softened, so correct everything in this manner to your advantage.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Here is the translation: The food of the patient should be given according to the previous order, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and thus, the food should be thickened from then on.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here is the translation: The duration of the cushion and the leg rest are usually forty days; and thus, they should be removed and warm baths administered, and medications with soothing properties given to correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	Here is the translation: If the fracture is adhered, do not remove the ligament and bones within ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Here is the translation: Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Here is the translation: On the restoration of a fracture in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Here is the translation: The arm consists of two bones that are called the two forearms; one is small and located at the end of the upper arm, and the other is large and located below the lower end of the upper arm.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Here is the translation: If only the larger forearm is fractured or both are broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	Here is the translation: If only the smaller forearm is fractured above, the restoration and healing of it will be easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	Here is the translation: If both forearms are fractured below, the fracture is severe and healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Here is the translation: This is even more severe when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Here is the translation: Therefore, if the bone fractured is the smaller forearm above, the doctor should carry out the restoration with a small, gentle extension and immobilization until it heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	Here is the translation: However, if the larger forearm is fractured, a more vigorous extension should be carried out.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	Here is the translation: If both forearms are broken at once, the reduction of the fracture should not be done too forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	Here is the translation: The figure of the hand should be restored and extended on a cushion; the wrist should be positioned above, as previously said, and the elbow lower than the other mentioned areas; and the patient should lie down on a bed with a headrest.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Here is the translation: There should be a cushion in front of it at an angle or elevated position, so that the patient does not exert themselves.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Here is the translation: Then extend the arm above and below with your hand or ligament, and another assistant extends it in a similar manner above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Here is the translation: Then the doctor should immobilize the bone until it reduces to its best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	Here is the translation: If there are fracture fragments, you should try to reduce all the pieces in their proper position with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	Here is the translation: If a separate fragment appears that pierces the skin and you are not confident in its healing, you should make an incision over it and remove it according to the method previously described.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Here is the translation: If there is a fracture with an open wound, I have already discussed it in a separate chapter, so take care of it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	Here is the translation: If an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, line up a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; stretch the cloth over it with a gentle compression until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered moly with clay of huou, and place a ligature over the fracture, which should be tightened and tied firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Here is the translation: You should know that the number of bones in the arm is seven in major placement, or a fracture in one forearm or both at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here is the translation: Then apply your compression at the location of the fracture firmly and forcefully, and when the reduction moves upwards above the fracture or below it, loosen the compression slightly as previously described in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the translation: The bandages covering the fracture should be soft and moist, neither hard nor harsh; the thread used for tying should be of moderate thickness as previously recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the limb for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that occurs in the member, then you must bind the member with a cold water bath until the swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Let the member not be bound until it returns to its normal state and the swelling subsides.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has been softened and the bone has returned to its normal condition, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider more whether nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, for then you must soften it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it again, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any of the causes mentioned before, then it is not necessary to be released until about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then, keep the patient's hand suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the repair of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that when the thumb or fingers are crushed, it results in a fracture and not just sprains watched over for a long time.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or sprained, then it is necessary that the patient rest with his arm hanging down and elevated to the level of the chest, and place his hand over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then, the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them until they are well-aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	It is necessary to apply plaster and padding, unless there is an abscess formed; in that case, place a steel pin according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	However, if the fracture is in the palm partitions, you should wrap the belly of the palm with a bandage and command the patient to squeeze it with his injured hand; it should be tightly bound with long linen.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Let the steel wire with cotton in which there is some slack be applied to the palm, so that the wire can be applied to the palm; tighten it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	However, if the fracture is in the outer partitions, then place a steel wire and another wire on the outer partition of the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and tighten it, as the hand is rotated at the wrist between the fingers with linen.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is a phalanx, bind it according to what is needed and tighten it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight steel wire on it to elevate the fracture and prevent it from becoming crooked.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in another finger, such as in the middle one, index, thumb, or ring finger, then bind it to the finger so that it heals correctly; or bandage them all continuously, which is better; or place a small steel wire on it, as mentioned in the phalanx.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In your treatment, consider the disposition of an abscess and its opposition - with the opposite operation - against what is needed when any cause of this occurs, as the narration of it has been repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the repair of a femur bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is sprained and declared to be broken and identified by the sensation when it becomes swollen in front and above the skin.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The treatment of it is done by binding the linen on the fracture and another linen below the fracture, and the patient is laid down on his stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then, extend all the linen to its side according to quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	However, if it is protruding from the groin of the thigh, then bind the linen close to the groin at the side of the adductor muscle, so that the extension moves upward, and another bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is protruding from the backside, then make the linen close to the groin and let the extension be towards the sides.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor aligns the bone with both his hands until it returns to its natural position and the bone is joined well; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	However, if there is an abscess, you should leave it for several days until the abscess heals, and then return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage for it should be made like this: cover the fracture with a thick bandage, fold it twice or thrice and remove any excess; then wrap it around the knee joint and the groin of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long iron splint between the thigh and the knee joint near the groin on the sides, and the ends of the splint should protrude from the swollen part on both sides; then revolve the splint around the thigh and knee joint so that any excess bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Approximate pressure should be applied on the thigh at the site of the broken hip fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the thigh.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the space between the thigh and hip with thick cloth to promote blood clotting.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Begin with a strong bandage wrapping around the location of the fracture using three or four layers, and gradually move away from the fracture site as the bandage becomes less tight and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the linen strips from both ends to reach the ankle of the foot, and stretch both ends of the splints on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Apply the bandage in such a way that it does not cause corrosion, ulceration, burn, or inflammation of the member, similar to those conditions; and if any of these occur, then carefully remove the bandage, correct whatever has happened as soon as possible according to what has been previously mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pus in the bone, it is necessary to pack it as much as possible; and if this is not possible, drain it and remove it, and cure with whatever remedy has been previously mentioned until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases this hip fracture is stronger than those that are set with splints, as has been mentioned in the adjutorium and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in this type of healing, do not cause the patient to limp; if it is only restored, apply the other thigh as well, then it is necessary for the limping leg to be treated immediately.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Know that the thigh is strengthened in about 40 days or a few months, and this depends on the complexity and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the heel bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the healing of the heel bone fracture can take a long time, but it often occurs in several weeks.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If there is a fracture, it is not simply a crack or break in the bone, but rather a wound or multiple wounds, and on this everything depends.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The healing consists of packing what is broken in the bone fracture with the substances mentioned until it is united and healed as easily, accurately, and efficiently as possible.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Apply plaster and place a round splint on it if necessary; and strengthen the area with bandage as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the precautions that have been recommended for other fractures, such as cauterization and similar treatments that prevent any accidents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken thigh bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is large and is called femur, while the other is small and is called patella (kneecap).
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	If there are various types of fractures that occur in the two bones of the arm, and the restoration is made as with the arm, the operation for both is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken at the same time, the thigh bone is broken into many parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the smaller bone (patella) is broken, the thigh bone is broken in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the larger bone (femur) is broken, it is located behind, and these are the causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Apply extension, alignment, and ligature of the splints as described previously.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the thigh bone fracture is shallow (not displaced), the extension should be less and gentler, and do not force it too much.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	If there is any cause for operation on the thigh in relation to the arm, when you bandage and complete the entire operation, you will take pieces of pine wood that are cut to fit the causes that have been mentioned previously, and are made exactly like branches of the palm; align them according to their small curvature, and not be too rough, and the length of these should match the length of the thigh from the hip to the ankle.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length and place one on the fracture site of one side and the other on the other side, with a distance from the hip to the ankle.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Place the two splints in three locations on both sides of the middle location, as this structure prohibits the thigh from bending to the right or left side and maintains good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a basin of linseed oil is administered according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on the leg to keep it motionless.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Moreover, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is truly a wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Furthermore, consider the leg every day and study it carefully, and keep it from abscesses, inflammations or other similar causes; when any such cause arises, then apply whatever treatment is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot, and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not every part of the heel experiences a fracture, but some bones in the foot may experience fractures occasionally; as for the toes of the foot, fractures occur rarely, and they do not easily dislocate.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones sometimes rise above each other, then the patient should lie down on the ground in the manner described earlier.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then one foot should be placed on the raised bones, and the other foot should press down, hold it in place, and keep pressing until they return to their original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and padding on top, and place a small table with two flat handles below the patient's abdomen of the affected leg.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen the fractured limb with a downward traction device, as you have wrapped it with bandages and other necessary supports.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, you should loosen the ligament, because you will find the bones compressed, broken, or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if a toe is broken, you should set it and immobilize it in the same way as I have recommended for setting the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken toe in a straight position according to its length, and keep it slightly bent towards the body; place the affected leg on the table that I have recommended, and strengthen it with proper traction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if more than two or three bones are broken, you should place a splint of appropriate size around each affected toe, and raise the table to the highest position under the affected leg, and have the patient stand on one side of the table, away from their abdomen to maintain proper support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all possible causes as I have mentioned in the other fracture sections, and be prepared for any accident that may occur.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the pelvis in a woman, the pubic bone in a man, and the tailbone (coccyx) in both genders.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pelvis in a woman is broken, you should cause it to rest on a flat surface and gently incline it towards the separation of the two halves, keeping it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The woman fills the cavity with cotton and it is done in the cavity as expected; and the woman is struck, and her hips are gradually raised because everything is forgotten until she is before the parting of the cavity as expected and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then pause powders on her hips, and when she wants to urinate, she moistens the cavity with ease and urinates, then collect it and return it as described in the manner in which it was previously placed, and then return the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Make this for seven days or until it recovers, because that will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a bladder of an ewe and force a canal of cane through the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and inflate the canal with virtue until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be filled with cotton and kept for as many days as recommended until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of a male or female pelvis are broken, then administer in its healing and alignment what is recommended for the bones of the hip according to the medical texts.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the correct thing should not be hidden in these near fractures that do not occur often, especially to those who have some knowledge and use of this book; because that fracture signifies for you in the greater dispositions the right path in healing and in the stricture of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the man's anus when it is broken, take guarguamela of oak, and put it on it; then pause over it with a covering of cloth, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or until it recovers, and healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the healing of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for those who suffer from a fracture with infection, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, or similar to them, that you cauterize and probe it as soon as the conditions of cauterization and probing are favorable, as previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection flows pus, you should take care to retain it until it dries up, and then sprinkle it with powder of three times, unless other reasons are present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin the healing of the fracture on that day itself, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess is cauterized, you should allow the healing to continue for up to nine days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth thereafter, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, you should be careful to reduce it and close it with your hands as easily and with little extension possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the position of it with your hands, you should reduce it with this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width according to the size of the injury; and it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is required in the healing of any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	It should be round and slightly rough to avoid twisting during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have a sharp end with a margin on its edges, and the upper part should be thickening towards the middle, and from the middle to the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means small pallet.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it should be paused with the end of the instrument raised above the protruding end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And call for a surgeon to attend it until the bone returns and is closed with some positioning.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Thus, you must close the fracture ends with some positioning, and if the fractured end is subtle, do not use the instrument for good reason, but instead insert the end of the bone into the instrument until it has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what is recommended, then insert it with one of the instruments mentioned before, or use one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then file down the remaining bone that has roughness and small irregularities.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient begins to feel intense pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to confer great benefit on the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your healing of the bone is complete, immerse a black stiptic cloth in wine and place it directly on the wound if it's summer, but do not pause over the infected area or any other cause with oil, because this will prevent pus and corruption from forming.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Administer stitches at the time of the patient's bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed only to the extent necessary, incising it with a scalpel and using bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Take great care not to strain the wound with a fracture, for many times ignorant doctors have caused death or severe illness or amputation by such treatment.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the patient's stricture is soft, flexible, and different from other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or bad, and you fear a possible accidental injury there, and feel pain in that area, then it is not necessary to make stitches, but apply a hard bandage instead of stitches and strengthen it with that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins after one or two days due to a blow, remove the cloth that you had placed on it and apply cold compresses, which is our custom for treating wounds, such as a four-fold ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the ligature and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the purulence runs out of it with ease towards the surrounding areas.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound has passed many days without being consolidated or abscessed from the blow, then you should know that here are signs of gangrene, and it is necessary to examine the wound with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And those signs that are separated and drain, those that do not separate but place the limb and cause pain, cut them out accordingly as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound swells or emits an odor, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to make an incision with the one that is appropriate for the cure of which there is a preceding discussion in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in that matter where you must give the most attention and present your judgment: when the bone is broken, make an incision on the limb as with the bones of the thigh and the forearm and similar to those of large members, but do not attempt to attract it or extract it because many times this leads to death; leave it inside until it can be set, because it may fall apart by itself within twenty to thirty days. And if the wound is visible, heal it, but do not leave it as it is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knots that occur at the site of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Often this knot occurs during the healing of a fracture, and especially near joints, and it is hardened by the shape of the limb; and greatly it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the knot is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and ensorcellum, and look, and sercacollo, and similar ones; in this way take some or all of them, and compress them with vi stiptic, or album of huou, or vi agre, and place it on the knot with a plaster, and constrict it well.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Let the extraction of the knot not loosen it for many days; and remove it when the knot is gone; or strengthen over it a plate of lead firmly, because lead has the property of keeping anything that swells in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already become hard and is tight and necessitates removal, then cut it carefully at the highest point of it, and incise the excess and protrusion or remove it with some resoris until it is gone; heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Title. XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When restoring a broken bone, once it has been set and allowed to heal naturally, let the limb remain immobile.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	Once the broken bone has healed, let the limb remain immobile except in the following cases: if there is excessive swelling of the ligaments before the healing process is complete; or due to excess tension of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bruising; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or due to insufficient blood circulation and weakness in the patient.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Treatment consists of feeding the patient, stimulating their circulation until blood is produced in abundance, administering baths, and providing comfort and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Cover the affected limb with a plaster to draw the pus out, or apply cold water compresses until the circulation returns and the limb regains its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Title. XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Treatment for fractured bones that have been improperly set and require further surgery.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the repaired limb is still crooked or has a prominent fractured bone and nodules, if it appears misshapen, but the limb's natural operation is not prohibited, it is not necessary to receive the word of someone who claims that the limb was recently fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and healers who have performed such operations in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as leading to grave consequences, including death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limpness and nodules are recent, they should be treated with cold water compresses containing soothing herbs such as althea, dittany, mellilot, and similar plants; and they should be wrapped in a plaster made of soft materials such as diluted white poppy juice or guaiacum oil, or treated with mucilage from althea root mixed with colomba wool or olive oil, and then wrapped with that; or they may be treated with fat figs macerated in honey and columbine leaves, like the medicines known as "amaranth consolidation".
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	In some cases, the deformity may be resolved with gentle, continuous friction using a damp cloth and encouraging movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has advanced and is hard and turns into a stone and requires surgery to correct it, it is necessary to remove the pus and dissolve the bone with the help of a surgeon, then carefully cut away any excess nodules using fine instruments, and administer ease and comfort to the patient through gentle manipulation and careful study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Title. XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation refers to the displacement of one of the joints, which causes it to be immobile, distorts the shape of the limb, and brings great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the joint as soon as possible, because if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes separated and difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And it is important that the patient remains calm and still during the reduction, as excessive movement can cause spasms and prolonged pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If reduction is not possible, it may be necessary to perform an incision on the patient and allow the joint to separate further before reducing it with greater ease. This should only be done after the patient has been properly anesthetized and the area has been prepared to prevent infection. The affected limb should also be immobilized with bandages soaked in warm water and oil, and gentle manipulation should be used to reduce the dislocation as smoothly as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be healed with whatever is necessary for their recovery in their proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And the chapters on dislocation follow those on fractures, from the upper to the lower parts of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Title. XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment for dislocation of the jaw follows.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the dislocated jaw cannot be relocated with minimal movement, and it is dislocated completely, it should first be softened before attempting to return it to its place. This can be done by applying pressure on the sides or having the patient bite on a cloth until they can open their mouth wide enough for the jaw to be placed back in its socket, with the tongue wrapped around it.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is minor, it should be treated with the utmost care and caution to avoid causing further damage.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and total, prompt reduction should be performed with caution, but not delayed.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The doctor should position the patient's head, then insert his thumb or two thumbs into the mouth of the patient to locate the dislocation if it is on one side, or insert both thumbs simultaneously if it is on both sides. The rest of the doctors present should hold down the other parts of the face to keep them from interfering. The doctor should then tell the patient to relax their jaw and let it move in opposite directions, and gently guide the jaw back into its socket. Once the jaw is in place, the doctor should wrap it with a cloth to keep it there.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If reducing the dislocation is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil to the area, then ease the reduction of both jaws gently without delaying it too much. As previously mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Once the jaws are relocated and wrapped in place, the patient's mouth should be closed and not softened further. Then, let it rest for a while on cotton pads with wax, made of wax and rose oil. Cover it with a clean cloth and leave it to heal gradually.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Make the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows to keep it straight and prevent it from rolling to one side or the other. Do not force any food or drink into the mouth of the patient. Give them only liquids such as broth until the pain subsides and the jaws are no longer swollen. Then, you may give them what they desire.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Give the patient light food and drink, and avoid forcing their mouth open for eating or drinking until the jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they do not return to their proper position, observe for signs of fever and sodium overuse, and administer strong laxatives and pure emetics to induce vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see these signs, know that it is a disaster; and in ten days, the patient who experiences this will die.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Treatment for dislocation of the neck and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The neck is not dislocated from the back by its continuous connection with the spine, and sometimes it can be dislocated to one side, which can be confirmed through examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The treatment for this is to have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then, grasp the neck with your palm and apply strong pressure to keep it in place, as it will return to its proper position.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Place a warm compress on that area and hold it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the extremity of that bone which is continuous with it cannot be dislocated at any time; in such cases, it should be reduced and immobilized as previously mentioned and according to what you are equipped with.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Place a warm compress on that area, apply pressure and bandage it. Tell the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	With this treatment, the dislocated extremity of the muscle is reduced and returned to its proper position.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Treatment for reducing a muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle can only be dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip of the coccyx to the side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which can be corrected quickly and should not be dislocated behind the shoulder or in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Dislocations that occur outside the side of the coccyx are more common and can be easily reduced in those with little flesh; however, in those with thicker flesh, it may be difficult to dislocate it.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	In some cases, trauma such as a blow or fall can cause the muscle to develop an abscess, which should be treated with cauterization and drained if it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you must spread this substance that is over-secreted from him, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known as the dislocation when it occurs at the joints and you should feel for the displaced muscle; so that you may distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal one, because you will find differences among them; and you should feel for the head of the displaced muscle and then touch the tip of the head of the muscle like a hawk, and the patient cannot return his hand to its socket or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a dislocation, you must touch the limb or the joint and make sure to feel its exact location, as it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And with this type of dislocation, there is usually an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction is when the assistant raises the patient's hand to the joint above it, and then places both hands under the affected area, lifting it with force towards its original position, while the assistant raises the patient's hand, stretching it out; and then holds it in place, so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	However, if it does not return despite the previous instructions, and if it is in the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, you must have the patient bathed in warm water and administer a poultice that softens and soothes, such as a mixture of chamomile tea, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and administer it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Place the patient on his back and hold him down gently but firmly, with a wool pad placed between softness and firmness, and the doctor should place his foot on the affected area and lift the head of the muscle with force; at the same time, pull the patient's hand towards the unaffected side so that it does not protrude from the joint, and another assistant should hold the patient's head to prevent it from protruding from the joint, as it will return quickly to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, reduce the patient in this manner: and it is that you bring a man who is taller than the patient, from the side of the bed, and penetrate his muscle near the patient's groin and lift the patient's groin area towards the incision points above, until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lightweight, then it is necessary that the one who causes the weight be suspended, in order to ease the displacement, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It is reduced in the same way by another method: and it is that a long pole with its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, be placed near the patient; then cloth lion skins are placed over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their hand is extended towards the other side; and the part of the other side should be strong, for the joint returns quickly to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction is difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two forearms, and its width four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the handle according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Cloth lion skins are placed over the rounded head of the pole to prevent the pole from hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The patient's groin area should be placed near the pole, and their hand or arm should be extended over the pole towards the other side; the pole should be covered with a leather strap and the arms and hand of the servant.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The arms should be placed on a step according to its width, and the hand extended towards the other side, while the other part is suspended, for the joint will return quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the penetration of the instrument is complete according to any method possible for you, then it is necessary that you place a sheep's wool pad over the groin area; and apply a plaster prepared with flour and egg whites over the entire muscle, so that it is rolled up, and tighten it around the groin area with a suitable bandage; and the linen should be wrapped over the plaster, and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck, relaxed, and not be swollen for 7 days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary that the patient's diet be limited until the affected member is comforted, for it is easier to heal in this way.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the diet should be given more meat or eggs, and exercise should be done; therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated for multiple observations due to moisture or other reasons, then in that case it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and the linen and joint are not closed after seven days, and the plaster and bandage are reduced several times without being closed, and it cannot raise that arm towards the other side, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have been severed or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of that dislocation should be done by pressing and stretching the feet and hips or the back parts, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And administer the other bandage to it, and cure that one until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If there is difficulty with the healing of a member or slow movement in it, then have the patient bathe several times until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front and back, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not relieved by any means, because it is hidden by muscles or by a deformed shape, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, that is clearly indicated to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle with it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should cut it, and reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible before it forms an abscess cauterized, for if it forms a cauterized abscess, the reduction of it is difficult, and it does not heal easily; especially when it is towards the back, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and more painful, and may lead to death in many observations.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and below it, and they push the joint with the knuckles of their fingers or with the flat of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the shoulder joint, then you should return it as if doubling your hand with its other, until you strike the hip with the back of your hand using the side of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If reduction does not occur, then administer strong extension and movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Two ministers should extend the arms, and another two to ensure that there is no resistance during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The arm should be rotated completely, as it is wrapped with long fabric around its hand, or bound.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help in lubricating the joint and facilitate its movement, then apply strong pressure and push it back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The reduction process should be stopped over the plaster in which there is a rigid and excessive swelling with an albuminous discharge, and it should be compressed with a bandage of gauze, and tightened with a descent traction. The arm should be suspended from the neck, and left in that position for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its location, you should then remove the dressing from it and leave it as it is.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not strong, you should apply fresh plaster and bandage, leave it for several days until it becomes tightened, then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is difficulty in the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, you should administer humectation with bathing and subtle friction, compress it until relief occurs; or place a cushion over the affected joint, this being made of thick grease; and bind it, leaving it on the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove it and put it in the bath; when it is healed, you should scrape the joint with a heated friction tool, and apply it again over the affected area, three times a day, on the first day, the second, and the third.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has reached the intestines internally through bathing, until it becomes hardened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide patch over the wound, sew it on and press it down; and do this for some days, as the wound is moist and helps in its healing.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation, that is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is relatively easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed is required in reducing it at the time of its dislocation, before the location is closed or there is cautionary puncture.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have the patient extend their arm, and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint and push it back into place until it returns to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, in which case you should have the patient extend and reduce their hand on a table; if the dislocation preceded this, you should position the patient's hand intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can rest on the proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that's good; otherwise, you should strengthen it with plaster allowing the puncture to heal and leave it as it is; do not repeat this, because you cannot force or endure the reduction of it any further until several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may remain twisted; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened in any way; in this case, you should know if the nerves are broken or torn, and in such a situation, do not manipulate it but rather strengthen it with a hot cautery near the amputation site and provide some means of relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Once the shoulder has been returned, you should place it on the plaster that you have recommended, and allow it to rest and heal for 5 days; then remove the dressing and leave it exposed and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if there is no movement in it and some difficulty occurs, you should apply warm water and gentle friction for several days until relief is achieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of finger dislocation.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Fingers are sometimes dislocated at all joints.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	If a finger of these is dislocated at the palm or the back of the hand, you should hold the finger and push it back into its place with your thumbs until it returns to its location.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the finger's head and suspend the affected area, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Suspend the affected area and extend it until it is properly aligned in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When it is night, lay the affected area as described above and do not stop unwrapping it during the day or exercise with movement, but keep it wrapped at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Make it appear as if water, if the hand is dislocated in the abdomen and you place it at that division and make it appear as if water the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Making it appear as if water when the hand is dislocated in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation of any of the vertebrae of the back or neck occurs and remains uncompleted with other vertebrae at its location, then there is no cure for it, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and in many cases, some limbs or both legs or both arms, or one of these, are softened or dislocated, or a vertebra is removed from its location, because in many cases, it is dislocated and the removal of these is made to four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been removed at the back parts and is called scoliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment for it is to consider whether scoliosis occurs in childhood, because in that case, there is neither a cure nor healing of it entirely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in those cases that occur by accident or by blows or similar, the ancients used to discuss the methods of treatment at length, from which much returns with profit; but I have shortened it from that, because the small excuse for the excess of it, due to the more convenient explanation, with which I have explained and formed it using various instruments from that, and I will show and explain it here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in scoliosis of the back part near the feet, there is neither cure nor healing for it; and similarly in those that occur on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	There is no cure for these, except the one I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient is to be stretched on their back close to the wall, and their legs are to be extended away from it so that they are not pressed against the feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A straight stick is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the head, and another stick is tied to the feet at the other end of the head.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The attendant holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another attendant should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	A cloth is wrapped around the head of the patient and tied tightly with a linen strip, and the end of the linen strip should be attached to the stick that supports the head, and it should be held there; and another linen strip is tightened around the lower back of the patient, on the heels, and over the buttocks, and holds the legs; and all the strips are adjusted and tied to the other stick that supports the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The attendant should stretch the strip at the division of the stick, and the two sticks and the strips in their locations where they are fixed, should not be removed, but rather they should be loosened as we said earlier.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places their hands firmly on the vertebra until it returns to its place, or they place a table over it, and adjust themselves so that their feet are supported by the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose length or width is three feet, and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, into which the end of the table fits.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The mattress of the table is placed on the vertebra, and the doctor places their feet on the other end, and presses hard until the vertebra is straightened and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you want to turn the patient's head, open the pillow that is under it; and place yourself at the end of the patient's head, with two sticks whose lengths are each one arm, with the distance between them being a palm, and make a hole in each stick through which the head can pass, and they should be firmly fixed on the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Make another round stick with a handle, and turn it in both holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	At the end of it is a hole through which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm that can be turned; and in the other two sticks it is similar.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Tighten the strips that you have stretched in the patient's feet on the hole through which the head passes, and tighten the strips that you have stretched around their thighs in the handle of the stick that supports the feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You should also place a turner at each handle and have an attendant who turns the handle while the doctor adjusts the vertebra as we said earlier.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the shape of the thigh:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	When the thigh is set in place and the area is closed, then apply a thick plaster made of alum and lard, followed by linen; place another plaster over the first one using a flat tablets three fingers or so wide and long enough to cover the swelling, and on top of the division of the thigh bone.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And apply a bandage made of thin cloth that we have mentioned before, and use it to feed the patient with nourishment until he recovers.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there remains any threat in the area after recovery, it is necessary to administer medicines that dissolve and cleanse through long-term administration of the tablets, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been administered in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes there is a threat in the lower part of the thigh bones due to dislocation; this bone is already known to be weakened; therefore, do not apply any intervention on it with this medicine because it could lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not move except for dislocation; this does not occur to those who have displacement or cavitation in other small joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the pelvis can be dislocated in four ways: dislocation at the inner divisions, outer divisions, frontal divisions, or posterior divisions.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is more often dislocated at the inner divisions, and less so at the frontal or posterior divisions.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation at the inner divisions is that, when you adjust the thighbone of the patient with the healthy one, the affected thighbone is longer and the protruding part is more prominent than the healthy one; the affected leg cannot be folded, it must be tied up, and the location where it should be tied up is marked with a cauterized wound so that the head of the swelling has been reached.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the outer divisions is that the injuries occurring in that area are contrary to this injury.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the frontal divisions is that the thighbone expands as it bends, but does not bend without pain in the front; if it is pierced and cannot go forward to the frontal divisions, the urine is retained and the swelling is marked, and you must walk on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation at the posterior divisions is that the front part does not expand, nor can it be bent forward; the thighbone is shorter than the other one, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the swelling should be in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these types of dislocations is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic, in which case it has already been healed with the approach you administer, and therefore it is not necessary for treatment; in this case, no intervention should be made.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you must try to bring back the joint and extend it to the inner and outer divisions on both sides, moving it to the right and left; this will return it without needing further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong medicine and extend the thighbone of the lower division or from the side, or with thin cloth on top of the thighbone; another medicine should be extended above it as far as his hands can reach; and another medicine should tighten a tourniquet around the swelling, and have another person hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension should be made either to the lower or inner division towards the neck of the femur, or to the posterior or lower divisions at the pelvis.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension should be made all of them in one movement while the patient is lifted off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it is necessary for all types of dislocations to do what we have said about the treatment of each type of dislocation.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the treatment of the dislocation when it is at the inner divisions, it is necessary that the patient lies down on his back; and place bandages around the swelling in the area between the head of the swelling and its lower end; then extend the bandage above the neck towards the uppermost part of the pelvis.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then take another strong servant and tightly grasp the patient's arms, and forcefully extend the affected limb to its outer extremities, for it will return to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This kind of treatment is for light pus cure where the affected limb is reduced as opposed to other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if the patient is unconscious and unable to comply with this kind of treatment, then the two feet must be tied together firmly, lightly, across both the heels and wrists.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Make each of the ropes the length of four fingers, and stretch the affected side more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Suspend the patient over the post (or pillar) and let their head hang down as much as possible, and make the length of the rope from the ground equal to two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a strong youth to compress the affected area with his head, and suspend the patient from another strong youth, while the other youth gently but firmly pulls the joint back into place, as it will return to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in self-reduction (when it's a dislocation at the outer joint), it is necessary for the patient to walk on their toes as much as possible, and tie the affected side firmly with ropes around the limb and the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And pause two posts, one by the feet and the other at the head; and pause ropes adjusted to the middle of each post, which are wrapped with damp cloths so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between their legs, thus preventing the affected limb from being pulled too tightly.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And assign each servant to their designated position, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to their art (or technique).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the patient can comply (with the treatment), it is good greatly; but if not, tie it down carefully and guide it as instructed in the previous step.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The patient must walk on their own feet with crutches (or any other aid).
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is at the front joint, the affected limb should be gently extended (as described earlier), and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected limb, while using the other hand to rotate the limb around its axis. The affected limb should then be gently pulled inward toward the center of the body.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	When the dislocation is at the back joint, it is not necessary to extend the affected limb, but rather the patient should be raised above the ground and tied down firmly on a hard surface, just as it would be if the bone were dislocated in front of the joint (as previously described), placing it on its back and extending the ropes. This approach does not help.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It is necessary to apply compression with a wooden board on the joint location.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, since the reduction is complex, as you are aware of the joint reduction technique, and you extend two ropes from the patient, when you see them tighten and the patient extends their affected limb while relieving the tension, you know that the affected member has been restored — then you adjust the ropes and bind them tightly with plaster so that the bone is not injured in any way; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the rope and the plaster, and compare the two bones.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see them tightened in place, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and at this point let the patient walk around.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any signs of swelling, then return and rebind it, and apply pressure as before, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen the affected limb, and have it walk slowly on it for several days, until it is comfortable again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On treatment for dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: outside the joints, inside the joints, and towards the chest; but it is not dislocated in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their leg to their shoulder, then you will know the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the types of dislocation is that you make the patient lie straight, so that their leg is extended if possible; you attach your hand to the shoulder, and place your foot under it; and hold the arm with your palms, and keep it between your feet with strength, and another assistant extend their foot into the area where the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction is that their leg adheres to the shoulder without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then place them and make the leg adhere to the shoulder, and tie them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to them with leeches as was described in the treatment of hernia.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to a blow, and the dislocation of it is caused either inside or outside the joint.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that the ankle appears swollen coming from the joint where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for reduction of it is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease by the hands and placed back into its place as soon as possible.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated due to a blow, you must make the patient lie straight, and have a strong and skilled assistant from behind the foot in the correct place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And you place your right hand under the heel of the upper part, and your left hand below the foot in the location of the ankle bone.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push it with your left hand for two days, extend it with the left hand; and push the leg of the foot against the chest without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this for two days as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And push the leg of the foot against the chest on the third day, and you are at the ankle bone.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If it returns in one or two days according to this method, and if you see the foot placed, that is good; otherwise, you must perform the operation again, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reduction of it is prohibited by what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small stone in the earth fastened, and let it fit between their legs, and you already have wrapped them with cloth to prevent the patient from being hurt.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistant holds their legs, and another assistant extends the foot with their hands or leeches that are placed on the neck of the foot; and each assistant extends it against its extension, and the stone remains between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being drawn towards the outside of its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor places the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy joint towards the outside because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore, when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction of it is healed, you stop plastering it and drain it strongly with leeches, and tie the foot to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	You must be careful or protect the nerves behind the ankle because the leeches on it should not be vigorous and hurt it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; and if the leeches are softened, drain it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and therefore it will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If there is an abscess at the cautery site, you must administer the treatment as described in our narrative, in another place for healing and dressing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It must be placed gently without much effort, and if it is not difficult, it can be done easily.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some nodes of the foot, you must make the patient lie with their foot on a flat surface or table, as though they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand with your feet, and place your foot on what is below the joints, and press it with the sole of your foot inward until it returns, and watch that it is placed and does not appear at the site of dislocation.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a table underneath the foot of the patient, which supports the entire foot, having two legs, and strengthen it with a suitable structure for three days; then release it and let it rest from walking for several days until it becomes firm and its recovery is secured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by blow or fracture, or any other way. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that kind occurs, and you undertake its treatment and restoration, many times death ensues. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And it is not enough to approach the treatment of it presumptuously, but rather the one skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, neither hasty nor presumptuous; who uses only medicines that prevent gangrene and cauterizes solely, leaving the patient to divine judgment, except for the one in whom you hope salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, and where some hope appears. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, make every effort to reduce it at the start of the cause, before gangrene sets in. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a regimen that prevents gangrene and treats the wound with whatever is appropriate for it of drying agents. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is a fracture and happens in separated bones, then perform the setting of them, and do whatever has been said about simple illnesses in those locations. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid that which threatens the intestine in the paths of fear, as my preaching has guided you; because what is better for you must be desired from your Creator, more persistent for your glory, and more healthy for your true body during your times. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, the words of Albucasis are finished, to whom may God be blessed. (The numbering for this line is unclear in the text provided.)
Amen.	Amen.
